M:	Can you tell me when you first migrated to Australia?



Ma:	I migrated last year in September. 



M:	What were the motivations behind your decision?



Ma:	The main motivation was, like, I wanted to challenge myself. I mean.. Ive been working for 12 years – always in India, or was in middle east for a year. In 2017 I happened to go to UK for a while and then when I came back, and when I wanted to go back to UK, somehow it didn’t end up working out with my employers and then I had a friend over here in Australia. I spoke to them and he was like, give it a shot. If it works out, it works out. I don’t want it to be a situation where in 5 years down the line I’d be thinking – I had an opportunity or I had a chance, and I didn’t take it. So that was one of the reasons. The other motivation was like.. so being married for like 5 years, I was sort of thinking if we plan a family, or whenever we start planning a family, if we have a base in a secure or better environment, well get good benefits out of it. And also the passport advantage that Australia has, or the government benefits that anyone gets over here. I mean like, back in our country, you know the facilities we get – be it education, or medical benefits we get, or the advantage that the Australian passport has – so that 3,4 reasons were the motivations. The major motivation factor for me was my wife. She was like, I think you are saturated over here. You need to try something new and that’s where we started. And it worked out for us, like, the eight-10 months we were. We started the process and within 10 months we were here. 



M:	That’s very quick. What pathway did you take? Was it skilled migration. 



Ma:	It was skilled migration. So when we started the journey, my friend was one of the main motivation or motivator for me to try it out. So back in India, I used to trade in stock market as a past time. I made money, I lost money. So the way my friend convinced me was – you would have lost like 50 grand easily in stock market. Why not spend 50,000 for this – do your skills assessment and give a English test – be it IELTS or be it Pte – so why to spend 50k and see if you can score a good, if you can get a good assessment, why not try it out. So that’s how we started. So started collecting all my experience documents relating to it. So then, last – so back in India, I had my 12 years of experience – I worked with like 6 different employers and like fortunately, I had a very good relationship with both of them. And I spoke to them and I said that I need an assessment roles and responsibilities letter from you stating that this is the role that I did, and this is the responsibilities I had and I worked full time – whatever format I need. And we got that letters within 10-12 days. Its like I was fortunate enough that all my managers or managers in that point in time were still there in the organisation. I just had to drop a mail, give them a call and they were like okay. So, the first question they asked me was – what do you want in that letter? I was like I have already given you. You just have to validate that and give it to your HR. If youre fine with the format and whatever I have written into it, then you can go ahead and tell your HR and get it signed and send it back to me, or Ill come to collect it, if theres a need. Since I had a very good relationship with them, they were more than happy to do that stuff. And yeah, as I said in 12 days I got all the letters.  The other thing was cracking the English test. I was, like, deciding between PTE and IELTS test. So, I did some search, spoke to couple of friends, went to migration forums, understood which one is easier to crack. Then decided that PTE is the one because one can fool computer algorithm and crack the exam, but.. When I say ‘fool’, its just that, you don’t have to right or wrong – you just have to pronounce few words in a particular way and the algorithm will understand that yes, this person can speak in native English. In IELTS there is a person sitting in front of you. He or she may be biased. He or she may not like what you are saying. Or he or she may judge you based on the way you are communicating, even if you are giving the right answer, they may say that the person is not understanding. Whereas for a computer, you just have to say things in a way that the algorithm wants to hear it. And with some practice tests…and… first attempt, I didn’t crack it, I mean, I didn’t get the score that I wanted. Second attempt, I got the score. Then I did the, by that time I got the ACS assessment done, and it assessed all my working years as a relevant experience. So, I happened to be with highest age points, highest experience points with English score. 



M:	So, whats the profession?



Ma:	I am basically, you can say a BI Analytics guy. So I’ve been working with Data, built in Data warehouse, dashboards – all like, last 10+ years. 



M:	When you said passport advantage, what do you mean by that?



Ma:	So like, for example with an Indian passport, I have to apply almost every country in the world to get entered or even for a visitor visa. But, with an Australian passport, there are certain advantages. Like, for example, like, every Indian or every sub-continent guy has a dream of working in US, and day by day, it is getting difficult. Australia has an e3 migration clause with the US which has about 10k migrants, I mean, they can take about 10,000 skilled migrants which only gets filled by 1/4th every year, from Australia to US – people applyimg for work permits etc. So, US has a streamlined arrangement with Australia where they allow like lets say, for H1B, they have a pool for 10,000 lets say. In the same way Australia has, lets say, 5000, which, out of it, only 1000 gets filled. So even if you read todays newspaper, US is trying to give that share, or whatever pending quota, to Ireland. So now, lets say. So, Ill give you an example of my friend, who took an Australian passport and applied for a US thing, and hes now in US. He took like 6 years time to get to US, but now he can work indefinitely, I mean some sort of arrangement wherein he doesn’t have to go via H1B or something. 



M:	So would you like to work in the US, or are you just interested in opening opportunities?



Ma:	Opening opportunities. Like, it widens your door. I mean you can go anywhere in the world, and work, or visit, or do anything. I mean like for example – I can give you a recent example. A funny thing happened. My sister and her family were supposed to visit us over here, in 2nd week of May. But their visa got rejected for the stupid reason like, um, there’s no, um, there’s no definite ties with India. I mean they are not going to go back. I mean, they said there is no surety that you will go back. I mean like, shut up. They showed a very good bank balance, they had a return ticket showing that they were gonna go back, they have a settled business over there. But still they didn’t get it. I am literally shocked. I mean my nephews and nicer – they were crying over there. Theres no option of appealing it – in tourist visa. You have to reapply it. So now, with an Indian passport, they struggled. So for example now, if I want to travel with an Australian passport, Ill be taken with arms open. I mean I don’t have to worry at all of getting a visa. I get an on-arrival visa from 100% countries. 



M:	What type of work do you do currently?



Ma:	So, let me put it this way. I was a manager back in India. I was managing accounts of different clients. Right now, I work for an in-house IT team where I am one level below to what I used to do. But yeah, im in my field. The kind of work I used to do, I am doing that. There are people who have to deviate and take different routes. But I didn’t have to do that. 



M:	How long did you plan?



Ma:	As I said it was 10 months. So, the actual planning started when I got my nomination approval or a state sponsorship approval from NSW, and I paid the visa fees. That’s when the pan started when should we migrate. 



M:	Research?



Ma:	I did an analysis. I considered all the various options available, like, coming to Australia was one of them. Going to Canada was one of them because I have my aunt staying over there. So, I can get an additional relative points and I could easily go over there. But I didn’t consider Canada just because it was too cold over there. There was an option of Germany where I can get a 6 months temporary work permit, where I could go over there, find a job, find a sponsor, and I could get a work permit over there. Or a temporary permanent residency over there. Then the 4th option was about moving to the middle east. I mean, it was always open. I mean, twice or thrice I rejected the options that I had – moving to the middle east for a bigger role or bigger opportunity. I didn’t feel comfortable over there because of the restrictions it had. Like, I have to be, like, I was there for a week in Saudi Arabia and I was like, terrified. I cant even take a picture of myself. If someone is there in my background, they might come and just ask me. So, I was there in Dubai. I liked Dubai a bit. The only thing, like I was apprehensive coz lets say one fine day, my employer says I cant, I don’t want you to work over here anymore. I have to again find a sponsor or else I have to come back. Like, I have seen cases where people have worked for 15 years, their kids were born over there but they have to come back. I didn’t want that to happen with me. I wanted something, like wherever we go, we stay. And also the other thing was, the parents thing. I mean, I thought about, like, if we move to Australia, theres a possibility that I can take my parents, which, I don’t think that Canada had that option, there were some conditions. And also weather wise, like my mom has high BP and some sort of heart thing so I thought she might not be able to adjust over there. Like 5 years down, like 2 years down the line, I want my parents to come over here – be it on, any sort of visa. 



M:	Family and role in migration. 



Ma:	So, my dad is a very hard working guy. We used to stay in like what, a 100 sq foot place. I was born and brought up in Mumbai. Me, my parents, my grandmother, my sister – so 5 of us staying in 150 sq ft place. They struggled hard. My mom and dad ensured that me and my sister gets the best of education. So because of my dads learning and experience, he played a key role in terms of deciding the way I think about things, or the way I see things. And my wife, like, last 6 – yeah we will be completing 6 years years in a few weeks. So yea in last 6 years she has played a very important role in terms of calming me down or, asking difficult questions to me, like whether you want to really do it, whether youre happy. Shes been a very good support system for me in the last 6 years. Even for coming over here – I was a bit scared, so she was like do you really wanna do that? I you don’t want to, you don’t have to do that. And then she was like, lets take a chance. Lets see what things has in store for us. And were here – in 7.5 months we have a job – both of us have a job, we bought a car. Wife’s into day care. Because she likes being around kids. By the way, shes an interior designer by profession but she didn’t want to study over here again. So, last work she did back in India was working with a day care. So, she was very comfortable with the kids. So, she was ready to study about day care and getting cert 3 in daycare or diploma in child care. But not about interior desigining because she was like, Ive given up. She worked for like 4 or 5 years as an interior designer and she was like im pissed off with all of the clients. Im better with the kids. 



M:	Friends/community 



Ma:	So, I had a childhood friend in Melbourne – the one who motivated me to try for it and one of my ex-colleague used to stay in Sydney. So, those 2 – and there was one more friend of mine who used to stay in Melbourne but before we moved, he moved to US. So, there were the only 3 people in my entire circle that I knew. During the process I did make good friends, in terms of via PR whatsapp groups, Expat forums, theres a community, or theres an app called discord for gamers but there was a guy – he has created a discord channel wherein..So discord has all these channels, and one can ask questions about the assessment, so this is not only for people asking for PR related questions. So we have a channel for jobs wherein people can share the jobs. If people have some location specific or state specific questions. And there theres just some interest groups wherein people are just talking about banking, or news or media – event we have a GOT spoilers channel. 



M:	Where did you find this app?



Ma:	So, this is, within the PR whatsapp group, we had this guy. So, basically this discord is for gamers. So gamers across the world create some channels or create some shared space where they can play different games. So, he modified based on the requirements of this PR group, or the requirements of the people. Like, say for example, for whatspp, the topics can get diverse anytime, and one cannot keep track of things. Like, one can ask about PR processes, so you ended up having these different whatsapp group. So, this is one channel. Log into it and you get different access – you can ask different questions, you can tag people. 



M:	How did you come across whatsapp group?



Ma:	Via expatforum. 



M:	What type of different visa options did you consider. 



Ma:	I explored various – I mean I explored 189, the independent visa, state sponsored. I also evaluated 489 – the regional one as a last option. But yea, I explored all these various options. But yea, first thing that I got was the state sponsorship so I picked it up and went with it. 



M:	How do you consider yourself to be a skilled migrant?



Ma:	I mean, I am skilled migrant. Even if there was no pathway and if I had given an interview and someone was willingly ready to sponsor me, I would’ve got through that way as well. 



M:	Mapping



Ma:	I think theres no stage in my case, because everything was done in like 10 months. Skills assessment was done by ACS. Its fresh in my mind. I can put the initial thought as well. Started collected documents for skills assessment from December 2017 and then I applied for ACS in December 17 and then I did my PTE. I got results in Feb 18 from ACS – positive assessment. The document certification, I did everything when I was submitting for ACS. I did PTE twice in Jan 18 within the span of 10 days. First time I gave it, I didn’t get the required score. I wanted a 79+ - I didn’t get it. So, second time I decided let me try again because, at that time it was a tight race. And as we know that the doors are closing. So I had taken a – PTE, has a PTE gold test kit. Its like course, but its like, how the actual exams pan out. So, they have silver, gold, and platinum. So ,silver is one test, gold is 2 tests and platinum is 3 tests. So, 3 practice tests and it does a similar evaluation – how the actual test is evaluated. So it gives you an idea how one applicant stands in terms of their oral communication, written communication, or understanding what the speaker is saying, or be it reading. 



M:	How much did these services cost you?

Ma:	It was about $59. Test was about $235, ACS was about $500, [document certification] was free. You just have to go to a district magistrate or local legislator and they just. They do it for free. 



M:	Was any of it challenging?



Ma:	Not really. 



M:	Role of technology.



Ma:	First and foremost it was google.com, expat forum, immitracker.com. So immitracker.com is not but just a free site where people put in when they have put in an application or when they have filed an expression of interest, whether they have got an invite or not, if they have got, when, or if they have lodged the visa. So, it just gives you an idea about the trends. But expat forum was like – THE platform for me – where I could find – all the answers were available on that. So, within expat forum, I happened to meet – I happened to be a part of whatsapp groups. Then from whatsapp groups we got the discord community wherein right now, about 300 people are there. 



M:	Were you using any social media avenues?



Ma:	I did join a few groups after I got PR. Like, theres a group for Indians in Sydney or something like that, when I was initially looking for accommodation, jobs – flatshare, things like expat accommodation something. 



M:	Were these helpful?



Ma:	Indians in Sydney, a bit. Because a couple of flatshares were available and I contacted them or they contacted me, and it might have worked out but then we found a place for ourselves within our budget. But yea, Indians in Sydney – a bit. But yea, its become a piece of a joke. I mean everyone on it is cracking jokes. People ask a serious question and people are just making memes of it. So telegram is also an app wherein one can post in different groups. So, theres couple of clients that I know. They were running like 5 different types of preparing groups – one was only about preparing for IELTS or PTE, one was only about preparing for pre-PR process, documentation and helping people with documentation, one was only for post PR wherein after getting the PR what should one do about migration checklist and then there was a jobs group. Since whatspp has a limitation of 256 people, telegram doesn’t have any limitation. One doesn’t even need to know the phone number because it can be based on email ID. One does have to get a link to join a group and then they can join it. Even discord is something like where no one knows your mobile number or email ID. Its your discreet identity, whatever you want it to be, because people think about the security point of view as well. I don’t want to share my mobile number with anyone so Ill tell you – this whatsapp group became a problem after I migrated over here because people were calling on whatsapp. I happened to be an admin of one of the groups that I was a part of initially. People were giving me a call at night at like, 2 o clock, 3 o clock because back in India it was like 9 or 10 in the evening. They used to give me a call, like, Mithun, we are at so and so points, do we have a chance, or people who already got the PR – did you get a job, do we stand a chance, do you have someone you can recommend us. But I couldn’t… so I left that group and said that I am part of this discord community so if anyone wants to have a question, I am free to answer over there. Whatsapp – So I was part of 3 different groups. Each had about 150-200 people. One was only specific to my skillset. It was defined only for business analysts and systems analysts. They had about, like, 150 people. There was a generic group only for people applying for 190 or state sponsorship for NSW. It had about like 200+ people. And there was a generic 189 group where everything was there. On an invite day – or when there is an invite round, there might be around 200-300 messages within an hour. Like 12 o clock Australian time, the invite round starts. So by 1 o clock Australian time, there would be like 300 messages. People might be asking questions like did anyone get an invite. If one said I got an invite, there would be 200 people saying congratulations. Or if one gets a PR, there would be 200 people saying congratulations, you got a PR. 



M:	Did you ever meet these people – or this was all online?



Ma:	Yes – yes, I have met. I mean we have – so all my friends right now in Sydney are because of this group. So, we have a group of 15 people over here. All the people I have met over here are via this discord/whatsapp group. So yea, they are like a part of my family, or extended family. If I have a turmoil, or if they have trouble well be there for each other. 



M:	Social connections



Ma:	So my college friend in Melbourne played a significant role. They were like, became my manager after I started my process – what stage are you at, where are you now? Then my colleague over here. I mean, I happened to train this guy when he was in pressure and he was the one who took care of me when I was here. We stayed at his place for like 15 days and he and his wife took very good care of us. And now this social media group. I didn’t know anyone and now we are a community. 



M:	Significant life events?



Ma:	Yes – So, as I said earlier, I wanted to go to UK – get a tier 2 visa and go for a 5 year thing and come back, and probably come back because in UK they don’t allow you to indefinitely remain. When my employers or ex-employers ditched me that we cannot sponsor you to UK – that was a significant event. So that happened in Aug-Sept 2017. One of the major events which triggered me to start thinking about other places. 


M:	How did this affect your family?



Ma:	My parents were like why? – BIG why! Because I was doing well. We bought a house. We were looking for a new house, bigger house basically. We had a stable life, everything was going well and my parents were like why! Everything is going fine. Why do you need to go? First question was, are you going for money? I was like money is never the question for me because I am. So I can say that I was earning aplenty in India where I could afford a house, a car, a pleasant lifestyle, don’t have to worry about anything. So, I was like, money is not a factor for me. Im going for our future. When I say “our” – it was about my, my wife, my kid as well as you – you guys – you have struggled all your life and need a peaceful life, or deserve better and I don’t think India would give that justice to you guys. And I want to really make you go around the world and.. then the other thing that I asked them was like if 5 years down the like I don’t want any regret, so would you allow me. So I guess, when we were taking a decision, it was a collective decision. So first one was why – but I wanted my parents as well as my in-laws - my wifes parents to say yes about it. They need to be in a positive mind, they need to support us, they need to say yes. If they said no, we wouldn’t be over here. It was, plain and simple – in my and my wife’s mind that if our parents – all 4 of us agrees, then we’ll go to the next step. 



M:	Was it hard to get them to say yes?



Ma:	No! We manipulated a bit. Laughs. Emotional thing – I made them explain. So, like 2 or 3 days was enough to convince them. So yeah, from that day till the day we got the visa – my dad and my mom did have a few questions, few apprehensions that we are just running away from our responsibilities towards our families. But that was not the case. That he realised when we got the PR and within one month we were planning to move over here – he realised how much prepared I was for taking that decision. He almost thought that, Im this way, Im just taking my time here. He didn’t realise that me and my wife were pretty much prepared for it. I said to my dad when I got the visa that I am arranging funds for you guys for a year because my dad has an income or its like, hes more of a retired guy. So I was like I am making arrangements for the funds for you guys which you can survive for a year and if need be, I can also arrange for one more year – if I don’t get a job or of either of us don’t get a job in Australia. So, you don’t have to worry about it. You don’t have to stay or do cost-cutting, live life in a shallow budget and all. That made him realise that we have planned and we are it just talking in the air. He realised that my son is going his pathway. 



M:	Tell me about regulatory aspects?



Ma:	So there was a police clearance certificate that I needed – the character certificate which was easy. I mean, me and my wife – we had renewed our passports a month, a year back so all the checks were done. This was – PCC was like April 18 when we got the nomination approval. So, as I said February – I just give you a timeline as well. So, March, I got an invite from NSW as well as Victoria. So March 18 is when we got our nomination, the invite wherein we had to submit all the documents. So, NSW approved me and within 5 minutes I got rejection email from Victoria. So basically, either of state only will approve my nomination. So, that’s where the PCC, then we did the medical in April 18 along with all the other documents like income, job or employment proof, tax returns along with the payslips.



M:	What are our thoughts on current policies?



Ma:	Yes, so it has changed a lot. So, when we started the process – it was like 190000 people they were inviting. Now its 160000. So 30,000 people have dropped down. And out of that 160, was about like, 20-30k more are allocated to regional and not to the metro cities. So we consider ourselves lucky that we just got in in time – just in time. Otherwise, I mean there’s one of my friends who is trying now and is struggling. Because he has to get like 80 points in skilled migration to get inside, and he’s struggling. I mean he’s tried for PTE, and lets say, if it works out, he might get his points. 



M:	Do you find yourself providing guidance and information?



Ma:	Yes. So as I said Im still part of this group where people ask questions, people ask queries. She gets angry at me. 



Wife: 	Its like, they give a call at night, 2:30 and like, Im not expecting to help you at like 2:30 at night. 



Ma:	So yeah, I still try to give back because I am where I am because of people who were ready to help me at that point in my journey. So, I still try to help people or guide people. So, there are, like my school friends who I had not spoken to for 15-16 years. Right now, they reach out to me and say that we need your help, we need your advice. 



M:	Obstacles/Challenges - assistance?



Ma:	Did we have any challenges apart from parents? Parents were a challenge. 



M:	Any social support?



Ma:	No!



M:	Significant advice?



Ma:	Yea – there were a couple of guys that were struggling and they were not decisive. So theres this guy from Melbourne who used to give, he was on 457 and he was thinking aboit applying for skilled migration visa and just when he was thinking about it, Victoria decided that… there used to be a pathway that 457 could directly convert into a state sponsorship. They were about to close it and he tried, he was scared, he wanted to do it but he got a bit complacent and didn’t do it. And one day is a day when finally it stops and Friday people started floating news that its closed, its closed. He got panicked and he gave me a call. He was like, Mithun I don’t know, I mean I didn’t do it yesterday and now they are saying its closed. I was like, are you able to log into your Victoria site? He was like yes. Would you be able to do your application right away? Yes yes, Ill do it, ill try but already it is closed. I was like, just give it a shot. Leave everything to destiny. And he applied for it. He was the last person I think to apply because they shut it down on Saturday morning and Friday evening is when he applied, and after 2 or 3 weeks, Victoria didn’t get back to him. Generally, for 457, if they are approving it, they get back within a week. So, even close to a month, they didn’t get back to him and after a month a reply he got a reply that his nomination has been approved. He gave me a call. He was so happy, he was like Mithun, you helped me a lot and you are the one because of who I was able to do otherwise I would have given up because he spoke to like 4 or 5 people and they all say – you can’t apply, you can’t apply. I was the 5th person who he gave a call and I was like you give it a shot. And I’ve seen people misguiding people on this process, or scare people, or what I’ve seen is people who have already moved over here – they try to manipulate people who are still in the journey. They see them as a competition and they try to… If you go to Harris Park or somewhere – they say that ‘bhai tera zaroorat nahi hai yahan pe’, you are not required over here. They feel like they are the rightful ones and we are the ones who are not required.



M:	Living?



Ma:	We didn’t have an option, or you can say we did have an option but my friend used to stay in Auburn and he was like, very adamant that you come to my place, stay with us. So, there was a different aspect when we stayed with them. This is the guy that I barely knew. We were just work colleagues and he was like more than welcoming us to stay at his place. They are Islamic but they were like, you come to our place. We were vegetarian so they didn’t cook anything non-vegetarian at their place for like 15 days – the number of days we were staying over there. They had a toddler and even he used to have, like, egg omelette in the morning. They didn’t even cook that for him. After 10 days we came to know that he used to eat that and we had to tell them – ofcourse that, its fine. We don’t have that restriction or anything. We are fine with everything. You do not have to cut your intake just because of us. So yea, They changed our perspective one more time. So since then, what we try to do, anyone from their PR journey, or otherwise wants to come over here, who is planning their initial move, I try to reach out to them and say if you need any assistance, we are there for you. I mean, if you want to stay at my place, you could stay at my place till you find a place or few of them, who wanted to come and they were pretty much unsure what to do. So, me and my wife – well tell them that you can come, and more than happy to host you till you can find a place. These are all people from social media. 



M:	Next steps?



Ma:	Citizenship – 4 year’s time. We are thinking about it so it’s still a long way. Maybe a couple of years later we will start preparing. So, for parents there are like. So right now only visitor visa is the option. But once we are here for 4 years time, we could sponsor one set of parents for 5 years + 5 years. And theres this long one, I think like 864 or 143 – contributory and non-contributory parent visa. So at the end of the day whichever option that allows our parents to stay with us for longer time or permanently, that’s the option. So yea, this requires funds and we are already planning to put funds away in order to have our parents over here. 





M:	Would you consider migration anywhere else?



Ma:	It’s too early to think about it but yeah, never say never. After coming over here, its like never say never. After 5 years, 10 years down the line, after getting a passport, if we get an opportunity somewhere else in the world. Or some remote place where we could spend our time and do nothing. Laughs.



M:	Any final thoughts?



Ma:	So before migrating to Australia we were thinking of buying a house in Mumbai, which is about 400k Australian dollars and we were planning to buy a house and we had to stop that plan and tell our parents that give us time of one year. If we don’t get through this process of PR, then we will buy a house. Otherwise we will go to Australia and buy a house here – maybe next year. 



Wife: 	next year!! In 3 months he said he wanted to buy a car. I was like, are you kidding? Getting a car over here in just 3 months. We started with a 20k budget. It was like 23k, we got the smaller versions, not the higher end versions. Then we went to our friends place and saw a better version, better technology and everything and he was like ok, we can increase. We can go to 30, max 35. Then he came up directly to 45 and ended up at 50.M:	When did you arrive in Australia?



Ay:	So I came here in March 2018 – a year from now. 



M:	Factors for decision.



Ay:	I used to stay in the US for 2 years… 4 years. Then on and off I was in the UK. I used to travel. So, I was supposed to go to US but all this visa challenges etc.. So, the alternative I was considering was Canada and Australia. Right, couple of options. Among that the favour in Australia was the weather and also the thing about Australia was the dual options to work in Australia and NZ. NZ is slightly behind from global opportunity standards but still it gives you multiple options. So, and also, if you look from an economy standpoint right, Australia looked like more opportunities available compared to Canada. So, these were more educated guesses from what I could find in research. This made me, and, more than anything, the process also was much more convenient and easier compared to the other parts – Canada or any other countries for that matter. And one more driving factor was when I shortlisted, English was a big factor coz if you try Europe or anything, the language barrier comes in. Australia was a big win and Canada as well when it comes to the local language. I started my career in India. So, pretty much born and brought up in India. Then I went to the US for 4 years, then came back. Then for about 3-4 years we were trying to go back to the visa process, you know with the economy changing, it got rejected again and again. So, then I took a couple of years off to decide what I wanted to do. But then myself and my partner thought it would be maybe good to just explore. Even now we’ve come here – we don’t know what’s gonna happen even 2 years from now. So, we’ve just come here to explore and so far, it’s been good. 



 

M:	Do you have children?



Ay:	Yes, I have 1 son who is 4. 



M:	Profession?



Ay:	So I am in IT and I’ve been working as a business analyst. So, pretty much work with all the global banks. I’ve worked with US banks, UK banks and how here with Australian banks. 



M:	How did you Plan your migration?



Ay:	So, the reason was not migration. We just wanted to go, and travel new places, just to see different cultures. So, it was US and UK for a while. So, Australia compared – 1 was work visa was an option but compared to that PR was slightly better. At least at the time I decided to apply. It was more like, lets apply and see how it goes. It was not like I want to go king of this. It was more like let’s just give it a shot and see if it works out then we’ll give it a shot. It was more like, baby steps. So, it’s very short. We started our thought process sometime like November 2016, and after a year and half I was here. Nov 2016 was when the idea crept in. One of my friends suggested. So, the thing about Canada – because a couple of my friends stay there – but we thought about Canada. There were a couple of factors – the cold etc. So, when you start talking to your colleagues or close friends, we thought, okay why not Australia. We started to do some research over the net – it was the immiforum, everything. What we found was it was very simple. Whether it’s a right thing or wrong thing, that’s a different thing – but it was very simple. What all they want was very quantifiable. So, it was just – we started addressing one by one, whatever needs to be done. Thankfully, the forums were very (what do you say) very explanative. Immiforum. One of my friends gave me the link. There are people who list A to Z of what needs to be done. So, you don’t need to worry about anything, you just follow. I think Immiforum, I don’t remember. When I started off, one of my friends suggested this forum site. So, you know when you search migration to Australia – one of the first thing that comes up is do you want to go to a migration agent who can help you with things. So, that’s was the call I had to make. Do I want to consult someone? Then I started with this forum. Anybody who knows how to work with computers could do it. It was pretty straight forward. So, I said we don’t need to spend that money. So,  then the thing was trying to get into what are the steps we need to do. So, Nov-Dec – December was pretty much trying to understand, alright what do we need? So, a bunch of English tests. So, we gave IELTs. That’s when I realised, I couldn’t write for nuts. So, you for for 10 years, with IELTS its back to basics. It was like school. So, I gave it a shot. Still, I was just getting 60 points. I was like okay this cannot be good enough. So next thing I did was I gave the ACS. That was a big shocker for me because they figured my 6 years of experience was not valid. So, I had close to 12 years of experience at that point, but they deducted 6. So, my points again went down to 55. [Laughs]. Then I decided to take the PTE. One of my friends suggested that. It’s a computer-based test and it was very interesting. I blogged it. I studied for a week or so. During that time there was an emotional turn in my family. My mother in law had a heart attack. I was in the hospital for a week so couldn’t prepare much. Then I called PTE to reschedule and they told me because it was less than 72 hours or something, so can’t reschedule. So, I just went there and took the test just like that and fortunately I got 20 points out of it. It was my first attempt and I did not prepare well for it. I just knew what the pattern was. So, that’s when I realised probably my English was ok. Sometimes it takes a test for you to know what your strengths are. So, 2 IELTS and 1 PTE. So, once I had that, I already had 70 points with me without even my partners points. So, I just went and submitted the EOI in April. That’s when they told me that since I was in the US for 4 years, I had to get the police verification done. That was the biggest thing. So, there again the forum helped me understand what I needed to do. That was the biggest process. So, I submitted the EOI. Had to do all the yards post US. That was the biggest challenge because now I heard you have tracking numbers but in 2017, they didn’t have. So, you had to send it to them, wait for 12 weeks, email them, call them to check if they have received because you have no tracking number, and this was like, you have to hand-write and post it via DHL to them. So, they don’t confirm to you. So, you have to keep on tracking yourself. So, I was more concerned about that police check than anything else. Good story was that within a couple of months I already got the invite. The first round – because I think from April to June was the freeze period, they don’t process the applications. So, one of my friends said you have the state nomination but since then, when I saw the trends, you know the immi trends, it was very quick. You know, the first round, I got the invite. So, I got all the other documentations in place but I was still waiting for the police clearance from the US because they gave us 2 months. Then I realise that when they sent the post to India, it gets lost. So, then I called them to change the address to post to my friend who lives locally in the US. So, when I started reading, people were saying that usually for India, it gets lost. So, they gave me an option to fill a form and submit change of address. So, I gave my friends address who stays in the US because you don’t need a physical copy. You just snap. So, as soon as he got it, he just sent me the snap through Whatsapp. So, using all that I was able to initiate my visa. So, once the visa was applied there was nothing to do, just waiting for it. So, they told it takes 9 months. So, I put it at the backburner and just continued to work, whatever I was doing. And the the CO gets assigned. I was checking every 15 days or so, nothing happened. But just, after the 30th day or 45th day I got the letter directly. I didn’t get any CO or anything. I got the PR grant straight forward. It was very smooth. So, I think I did something right. [Laughs]. So, the thing I was saying is that on the forums its pretty elaborate. So, since you work in the IT field you know how to name the documents and stuff. So, I made sure I have my own check list, you know, what I need, and do the forms etc. in parallel. So, it’s very quick from the time of initiation in April to receiving it. October 31st my letter was in hand. In India I had a 3 months’ notice period. So, you can’t move before 3 months. The good news was that I had 1 years’ time. So, it came in Oct, and I had until next year September (to move). So the 2 schools of thought were either continue working, bring your wife here, put a port up and go back. Then we decided it would be too much hassle. I was okay, what the hell, I’ll come here first, try for couple of months to get a job. So, decided okay, lets one of us go, while she can continue working there. So, see how it goes and then. 



M:	Community?



Ay:	So, first part was here I knew no one. Absolutely no one. So, at that point I didn’t even have people to tell me there were FB groups – the Indian groups in Sydney. When I researched on Sydney, random groups were coming. I did not even know they were people – Gumtree was something. Thankfully, I had a very close friend of mine from my previous company who had a very close friend here. So, probably a month before I decided to come, he just connected us. He said yeah just come and you can stay at my place. So, accommodation was settled but overall it was a challenge because, you also know, there’s still a little bit of bias. So, people, the agents who was supposed to give.. like.. you don’t get any opportunity. So, I was getting interviews on and off but still I came here March. So, Easter was April and pretty much April was pretty slow. So, not getting much done. Coincidentally there was a guy who worked for me in India. So, he used to work for HCL. So, he just told me, you just share with me your profile. So, I sent it to him. He sent it to someone, and the 3rd day someone called me and said that there’s an interview, would you like to attend. I said ok and that’s how I got this job. So, from what it looks like from here is not that bad. But at that time 3 months was pretty frustrating. Nothing much to do. To be precise, exactly, I got my offer in 2 months. Then the background verification took about 2 weeks. So, less than 3 months I was in a job. 







M:	Family?



Ay:	[Laughs]. Wife was pretty supportive – so, no worries at all. Son, was 2.5 years old so, couldn’t say anything. So, what are the driving factors – one, environment – from India you know, there is so much pollution. So, my son was falling pretty sick there. We are from the South – Chennai. We were not really sure why my son was falling very sick but from all my friends who were abroad, they would say, the probability is slightly lesser. So, we were like let’s give it a shot and see how he adapts. So, we felt it could work out better because he had this case. Its call febrile fits, its seizures, febrile seizures and theres no reason for it. So, he had these, little bit if health issues. So, we thought let’s go abroad and see how it will work. So, I came here and my wife was still back. So, the initial idea was I’ll come, get a job, work for 3 months, get some income and then I’ll bring my wife and son along. But, it so happened in the 3 months, my son was missing me so much. There was so much pressure on me for them to come here soon. So, the day I got the job, the 15th day I found a place – whichever place they gave me coz then I learnt a little bit about the rental history as well. Its not just the job. They don’t give you for first, like first time rental is not easy. Apparently, I was blessed, there was this one guy, this one agent who trusted me. He said, it you want it you can take it. I just want 12-month lease. But that was a hell. There was one day I saw 15 houses on a Saturday. I didn’t have a car and I walked 13 km that day starting from… so I had a calendar with me where I was listing from Rhodes till Westmead. I saw Rhodes, Denniston, Parramatta, Westmead – so I saw close to 15 houses in that day. So, the houses which were good had 50 people looking. So, I stand no chance. Houses which had no one, I didn’t like those places. So, after that finally one house was okay, not an issue. The agent said okay. So, that worked out. So, the day the rental was sorted, the same day I booked my flight back home. So, the first salary, I just booked a flight. I went over there for 3 days because I didn’t get a holiday. So, I went home, brought them. Prior to that, first month salary, I just went to IKEA, bought few stuff, went for the electronics, and a friend in Melbourne put it on some card she had that gives you 5 years interest free of something. and one more friend lent me some money and said just keep it. Give it to me after 2 months. And, so with all said and done, in a matter of one month from the time I joined, I had my family here. That’s what happened. 



M:	Option for work visa?



Ay:	Work visa, the company I worked for was not based from Australia. So, I had to switch work there. So, when I compare that, PR gave me more flexibility. Its in my hands what I want.M:	Lets just begin with about you telling me when did you migrate to Australia 



J:	Right, I am actually still on the process of doing it but, I am actually – migrate, as in move here? – okay well, I actually moved here on 2016 February. So I got a PhD scholarship so I moved here to start my PhD and then one of the reason why I came here is because my boyfriend is actually here so that’s why I was trying to get a position here instead of back in my home town in Hong Kong. But..umm..ofcourse and another part of it is my research is more planned environment and I think in Australia I can get better opportunities than in Hong kong, because HK is a big city and they don’t really care about environment as much.



M:	So environmental studies, or like the specific area of study you mean?



J:	Yes – the specific study – that – in that area – in that research are in HK is not that much attention as in here in Australia. 



M:	Okay – so motivations I mean you’ve basically covered that that’s the sort of motivation behind your migration, your boyfriend was here. And is your boyfriend studying here as well?



J:	He was studying here but like.. he was already a citizen here. 



M:	Okay – What are some of the factors that you considered while making that decision that yes I’m going to move. 



J:	aa. what are the factors … ummm



M:	Like – some, any points that you were considering at the time, were you considering other options, or was a fairly straightforward decision for you



J:	I think it was really straight forward. I have been thinking about it for a long time because I was with my boyfriend for 3 years and for that three years we are basically physically separated from eachother. Umm. And yea in terms of research I always think that HK is not a place for doing research and I really like doing research particularly in science, so.. that’s why I think its quite straight forward if I want to move to Australia and also ofcourse here in Australia, they have pretty good living environment as well as welfare which is one of those factors that I consider it would be a nice place to live in. 



M:	Are you finding it up to your expectations?



J:	It does – its pretty good. 



M:	Awesome – Tell me about your.. ummm we discussed youre from HK but your ethnic background, sort of, have you always been in HK?



J:	Yes - I have always lived in HK except that I went to Australia for 1 year for a student exchange program when I was doing my bachelor degree so that was 2000 and …it was a long time ago… it was 2011.



M:	Right, so did that factor in when you were making that decision, that you had already been here before and..



J:	Yea – totally. I actually ..like the second time I came here when it was 2016, I don’t feel as stressful. The whole experience is very easy to get into the society because partially because my boyfriend is already know everything and he can introduce me with everything. Umm. On the other side its just that one year of experience .. I kind of understand how the system works, like, where should I park my car, how do I drive, or like..like..tiny little things.. like where to go for my grocery… Its like  very tiny little thing that give me a bit of introduction on the first time so next second time its get easy. Yeah coz you already had been here and seen things so you were actually quite prepared to navigate the space 



M:	Great – whats your professional background. I mean youre doing this PhD now but what sort of background did you have before this.. umm.. and your general.. sort of.. broad professional field.



J:	Right, I study in Bachelor of Biology and then I got into a Master in Plant Biology in a specification on molecular biotechnology so it’s a very specific field I would say, it is a very narrow field in science. 



M:	And so you’ve been working in that field back in HK before, or…



J:	Umm.. not working, just studying.



M:	Alright, great. 



M:	How long did you plan your migration before you moved here?



J:	aa.. as in moving permanently, or as a student?



M:	On your first move.. umm..how long did you plan or consider that, and then also tell me about how long have you been considering PR?



J:	aa.. okay.. how long have I been considering that? I actually have quite a long time for considering that because when Im in the process for searching for PhD study, that was the time when I was finishing my Master , so I am already kind of like mentally prepared to find a PhD somewhere in Australia – I don’t care where, umm. So its not really that difficlut and even after I got the scholarship, and then I have like a half year, before I actually move here. So, for that half year I have plenty of time to slowly gather all documents and mentally really prepare to, you know, I am leaving HK. Its plenty of buffer time that I think would be helpful rather than you know, I decide, I am going now and then the next day I’m going. 



M:	So what are some of the specific things that you thought about in your plan?



J:	Specific things.. umm..not sure what you mean by 



M:	Like for example, what kind of plans did you make in the time that you had 



J:	I think mostly, I was just dealing with the visas .. that’s just to gather all my documents and then to graduate my Master degree, But in terms of like, actually packing, I don’t think I have actually done much on that aspect. I only deal with the packing on the very last bit of the time so I think for the most part of the time… from I know Im going to Australia to the actually moving, I spent most of the time just mentally preparing that Im going, and Im trying to finish off whatever I have left in HK.. like all the work and all the other stuff like that.. umm..but like physically actually preparing for the, you know, moving all my stuff, or packing, stuff like that – I only take like a week I think. 



M:	How did you learn about the migration options that were available to you? Was it your own research or did you have support from other people as well. 



J:	Umm. I think I just do my research on the internet because I think most of my peers.. they don’t really want to leave HK



M:	Oh really,



J:	Yea..



M:	So whys that?



J:	HK is pretty nice place – if youre not minding,.. like if you don’t mind about all the people, all the stress, I mean it’s a very fun place to stay in. I guess… and most people I know.. they have family back in HK .. they don’t really have an obligation thinking that they want to go. So that’s why. 



M:	What kind of research did you conduct?



J:	I mostly was just searching for PhD .. supervisors, like seeing if their (how do you call it) their specialty, their expertise, like is matching with what I want. That’s basically that. 



M:	Did you consider like plan B’s like, any options outside of Australia for Phd or was this the only option?



J:	Okay – so maybe I would have considered other kind of career choices within Australia but not a ophd somewhere else because its just easier for by boyfriend to be just staying heer because he has a engineer degree here and so kind of like, is physically, bounded to be here. 

M:	Coz, you, I guess were working towards eliminating that long distance relationship that you were in, and..



J:	Yeah..kind of like.. if Im going somewhere else, then he has to move as well and.. so it doesn’t make sense for me. 



M:	Okay, and great – that’s amazing. Tell me about the role of your family in your move



J:	They’re very supportive. They don’t want to move themselves but they are like oh yeah you should go, and explore, and find out, and that… but I don’t think they have much information, like you know, physically, not physically, .. I don’t know, like literally they would not know what documents you should prepare and other stuff, like, they don’t know it. But then they mentallty they are very supportive on my decision to move, which is great, so I wouldn’t have that burden of thinking oh what about my family if I am moving.. that kind of thing.. so its very good. Yeah, they kind of like, they already know my boyfriend and so they feel more comfortable knowing that I will have someome here that will support me when I first move here. It wouldn’t be as easy if I don’t know anyone here, then I just suddenly want to do a phd here. That would be more difficult I guess. 



M:	Right so – can you tell me a little bit about your boyfriend? Where did you meet – did you meet him Australia before when your first came or..



J:	Yeah I met him in Australia when I first came here and yeah weve been together since then. 



M:	Okay great. So in terms of friends and other community, I mean we discussed that your boyfriend was here already but did you have any other friends or a broader community that like, that were here before you moved? And also did that affect your decision at all?



J:	Umm. Well. I know a couple of people here already during the time when I first came here. But they are in Adelaide and at the time I actually got a position here in Sydney, which is like, they are quite far away from where I am. So, they are not really of much help to be honest. But yeah, I didn’t really consider that much because I have a lot of friends in HK but then I was thinking about that it is easy nowadays to keep in contact like with whatspp and all those FB groups and all those stuff. I don’t think, that even now, after moving here for 3 years, I don’t think im quite separated from them, like, although I will miss some of their gatherings but yeah, its still fine, like I can still talk to them and stuff like that so..I didn’t think that was a factor that I was considering. 



M:	Okay but what about now that you have moved? Do you find that yourself engaging.. like do you have lots of friends here now, or broader community..



J:	Yes, so I got to meet some more friends, mostly through my phd program that I can get to know other people within the institute. That was really good because it’s a really broad community.. there are locals here, and there are also a number of international students so yeah, they are quite supportive.



M:	Great – so umm.. and how long did your initial visa process take?



J:	Umm.. you mean getting the Phd? I think the Phd offer was pretty fast. Like, a month, because I applied for it and then within a month I got an interview and then my supervisor basically tell me yeah I would like you to join us, like, an hour after the interview. It was like, realy quick. So yeah, it was pretty, pretty good. Umm.. but then after that it was like half a year of gap because I have to finish off my master first. Umm but then after I finish my master, it was like 2 weeks of waiting on a student visa to get here, which is not that long. Like 2 weeks is not that long. Everything is like online, like through the internet and I don’t really need to talk to anyone physically. 



M:	Can you tell me how you consider yourself to be a skilled migrant?



J:	Umm, I think I am in science, a very specific field of science, which is important to the society in general because it is about the plants, its about the future of agriculture or forestry or environment so I feel that is very important thing. But at the same time the reason why I get the Phd here is that because they haven’t find a suitable candidate locally. Otherwise they could have find someone here locally. So I think I am just filling up a niche here that is not filled up. That is why I feel like I have the skills to come here that someone else here in Australia doesn’t have. So that’s why I think Im skilled. 



M:	Yeah, but, I mean and in terms of your future plans now to migrate or to get PR, is there provision for what you are doing in terms of how the skills system works here. Have you looked into that?..



J:	I have actually looked into the skill list. I think its called the skilled migrants list or something like that. I think agricultural scientist is definitely up there because they need that I think. 



M:	Okay, now we will get into the mapping part: Lets just start with visa categories, so from the point of initial arrival to your current status, are you on the same visa?



J:	I am on different visa now. Okay – let me see how I ... okay I can say ‘Julia moving to Australia’, and then I would divide it by stage. So stage 1, so, this was in Adelaide. So this is just a temporary one year thing but then during the time what information I have gathered for going to exchange is, first of all, I go to university- my home university 



M:	So did they have, like a program running at the home university for exchange?



J:	Yes, and then I just basically think Australia is a god destination so I think the home university.. they provide a list of different universities in different countries. So I kind of think that Australia is a good place to go. And I think the second factor, like, I mean that is pre-departural of this trip but then..umm.. actually I didn’t consider much.. I didn’t even think that was a permanent thing back then. But then I met my boyfriend, so.. this how it basically give me an idea of moving to long term. So then, I think stage 2 would be when I actually moved here as a PhD student in WSU. So that one was only 1 year and this one is for 3, no 4 years. The consideration is pretty clear. The consideration will be that my bf is here and then also it’s a very good place for career for a scientist and also I considered that it is a very good diversity place – cultural diversity, I think that they have a better acceptance, I think in terms of you know, migrants. In HK its not as many migrants as here.. umm.. also because my bf is not HK people and its easier if I am here with my boyfriend. Like if my bf come to HK then its more of a cultural shock for him. So I think, these are the major considerations I was having. I actually just look for the positions that were available.  I just look for whatever is available and I didn’t really contact anyone here beforehand. 



M:	Where did you learn about the possibility of.. did you know from your uni days that you could do this.. how did you know that you could..



J:	Just look for this kind of .. oh, okay.. umm.. I don’t know.. with research community, I think generally we know that, you know, its everywhere in the world.. umm.. I didn’t really specifically ask anyone. I just look up those university website. I didn’t know what do you call them.. like recruitment for just PhD scholarship. Like online website for PhD positions worldwide. That’s what I was looking for. And I actually did look for job available, for example, on other job search engine, like seek.com or stuff like that. But then ofcourse, at the end I got a position in Phd so this is the final thing that I got. When I get the position it was 2015, but when I actually move here on 2016.



M:	So all of this time you were in a long distance relationship with your partner?



J:	Yes, so.. I stayed there in Adelaide for one year until 2012 and then I move back to HK and during the time I just visit Australia like once or twice a year, yeah. 



M:	Tell me about any commercial services you used? 



J:	I think I was a poor student. I didn’t look up all of the options.. and I trust myself as a PhD student or a potential PhD student. I kind of think everything is already online. I can just follow whatever the direction over there. And the good think about moving from HK from over there because HK was a British colony so all the documents is already in English or in Chinese, so I don’t really need a translation. I think... umm... yes, about that, I actually got an education agent in HK, but then the whole reason of it is just because so many of the documents they need here, they need certified but then.. they basically.. what the service they provided me is the certification because in HK we don’t really have a service thing, that I need anything certified. So when I go to .. like.. here in Australia you can find a (what is that) JP or chemist? But then in HK when I go for a chemist or a bank and ask them for that they were like… I don’t know what you are talking about. 



M:	Did they charge for certification?



J:	No they haven’t. But I think what they do, like, later I found out is that the university will pay them back for providing that service actually. For accommodation, my boyfriend is already here so I just, he helped with a way to do it. Lets say he hasn’t actually physically helped me because he was still living in Adelaide then but then he would told me all the source on where I can find help or how I can find accommodation – stuff like that. But actually how I got accommodation is actually through flatmates.com. 



M:	So when you moved here, your bf was still in Adelaide? How was that? It was still long distance. 



J: 	But shorter [laughs]. At least its in the same country. For him its easier because of his profession. Its easy to move inter-city, like, in between the different cities within Australia. But if Im asking him to move to another country, its more difficult for him to find a, I don’t know, they have different kind of certifications for different regulations for different engineers and stuff like that. So its more difficult for him if I am asking him like, hey move to HK. So, moving inter-city for him is more just, you know, he has to resign from his job and then look for a new job here.



M: 	in term of your migration status now, are you considering PR?



J:	I am on a process of getting PR. I am, well, orginally I was thinking I wanted to get the skilled migrant, but with that one, I have to kind of wait for graduation – for PhD first. So I wanted to skip ahead so that’s why we actually applied for the partner visa instead. So, the 820 – which is the temporary partner visa – I am currently on that. Stage 3: I think I applied for it last year – that’s partner visa. The consideration I have is more about the career, because as a student, as a PhD student, you know we have that awkward period of time where we submit our thesis and then we have to wait certain months without any support until they declare – oh yeah, you can graduate now. So, I don’t want to have no job during that period of time. But then with the student visa we have this restriction that we can only work for 20 hours per week, which is really little. So I want to skip ahead and if I can get a partner visa, at least as a bridging visa, I can still work, like FT, instead of just having that temporary thing. So its more, just career – I want to jump ahead on the process so I can start working.

	

M: 	Wait time?

	

J:	I think it was from Feb to Dec. So now Im currently on the temporary partner visa. And then there is a second stage, so I have to wait now until my second stage. But I think the application is way more complex on this stage rather than that stage because I have to get so many different kinds of document to support but with that one I can go back and say, you know, the waiting time is one week or 2 weeks, sorry. If I’m saying like actually applying for the visa until I get it. 

	

M:	Commercial services in this process?

	

J:	I didn’t. But then I think information source – I think I get most of the information, I think its quite clear in the government website. Home affairs. Its quite clear what they want us to do. And then I also hav to get some from some online forum. You know there are some online forums that talk about how to get migration and how to prepare documents and I think this is one of my most major source on how to prepare. 

	

M:	Technology

	

J:	I think they are very important for me. For the stage one, especially during the time I didn’t know my bf, so it was so much more difficult to find all the information and I don’t think many people around me, during the time have go through that kind of process. So during that time it actually played a very important role for me to find all the information and .. but then.. back then its not as easily accessible, I don’t know, only 10 years, not 10, 8 years ago but it was much more difficult to get access to those information back then but then when I get to become student, like, all the other stages – I think they are really a lot of information available online. Basically just search for migration to Ausralia or something like that and they just come up. Yeah, its very important for me. Basically its my major source. I dont have any one in my family, in my friends that are going through that. 

	

M:	So any points of interest in the map?

	

J:	I remember there was one that was called Australianforum or something like that.. Australiaforum?... This one, and then during this time when I was looking for accommodation… so like flatmates.com which give me idea of where I can get accommodation. Skype with boyfriend or whatsapp. During the time, after my exchange and before I got PhD, so one factor, because my bf is here so I want to find a job here. But the other factor why I really want to leave HK is because this event happened – it’s a political movement called umbrella movement. So, what happened is that most of the HK youngsters trying to get a real democracy system to choose their – we call chief executive, but basically, the mayor of HK. We didn’t get a very fair system for doing that. Umm but that is one of the thing that get me really disappointed with HK. So, I guess that can go into it as a political reason. This is getting me very frustrated with the political climate in HK. Like the govt can do anything because at the end the movement, I mean, during this time of the movement they are a lot of youngsters that go for protests and they just sit on the road for ages, I think that go on for months. But then at the end the govt actually didn’t do anything. They just clear the site. It actually poliriased the entire society in HK. So the people, they probably think that it would be better for HK if we stay with China rule but then with the youngsters,l they started getting this idea of getting independence from China, stuff like that. So that is one of the idea that I feel that I am really disappointed with what is happening in HK. So, for – its kind of going into the idea that I already have that I want to move but then it actually strengthened it. It made me feel like I really need to move. I think to me, it’s not like a sudden change for me during this period of time. I think its more just gradually when I move here, and I’ve been living here for 3 years, and during the time when I’m going back to HK, I don’t feel as much of a connection over there as being here because I have my new friend circle and new society, so I don’t know, I feel more connected here nowadays than back in HK. It’s like a slowly growing, sort of, idea of moving.

	

	

M:	Any regulatory aspects, any significant govt requirements that you had to fulfil?

	

J:	One of the major challenge here is to get the police check in HK. That was a bit more difficult because I think for most countries they do it online. Ive heard that other countries you know, they just click click click, like online, and then pay for it, and that’s it. But in HK you have to get a Fingerprint first. I think I can write police check in HK. And then so, the difficult part is that it want me to get the finger printing and then also they only accept paper application. So they don’t have an online system. So, yeah its very confusing because HK is a big city and everything but then, it can be vert backward at times – paper application. The challenge is that the finger printing is not that easy because you don’t do it at home. They want me to go a police station locally and do that. But then normally in Australia they don’t ever do that kind of service for normal people. So, I called up the police station and they only … umm.. one thing. They don’t normally do it, They only allow you to do it locally in the police station that is closest to your suburb. So Im living in Quakers hill so they only want me to go to that one police station. You cant even get to parramatta or any other station. You only have to go to the really local local suburb. So the PS doesn’t normally do it. And then when I call them up, like I called them several times but then they were saying oh, if they have someone that’s retained in their, like, I don’t know, they have someone that’s retained in their room then they cant access the system to do that. So, I don’t know, maybe there are a lot of criminals around. Everytime when I called them up they were like, Oh we have someone in the room – sorry. So that too me, you know, really long time to do that. Like a month – to just to get a fingerprint. And then after that, because they only accept paper applications, they also charge me money. So, to do the payment is also quite difficult because they want cheque, you know paper cheque, which is very ancient. You know we don’t use that. So I think with all these things, The major thing I can say is Technology – they are not up to date on technology. That’s why its making it very difficult. Its very rare, but there are some people migrating from HK, they are experiencing exactly the same thing (forum). The other thing would be difficult because it’s a partner visa – you have to gather all the evidence that you’ve been together. This very, I mean its everywhere, like, you know flight tickets that we are travelling together, we are living together, we have a shared accoungt, but then all those tiny tiny little things and you have to gather them all in one folder or one file. Its quite time consuming I would say. Its not difficult but its just like I just feel like the whole process is a lot of time waste on it. I understand why but its quite frustrating that you are wasting so much time on that. 



M:	Current immi policies – do you have thoughts?



J:	Umm. I actually think its very frustrating that they have many things that they want to check up but at the same time I understand why they do it. So tbh Im quite happy with them being so tedious that they make people actually go through everything because they want to make sure that people actually migrating are the people that they want. I think in general that is good for the society. I complain about it but at the same time I think it is – yeah they should do that.





M:	Community services?



J:	I actually have a friend that recently go through the partner visa application. So I get most of the information and support from them. But generally, I don’t talk about me migrating to other people. I just think it’s a, its not a topic that I usually come up with. It’s a bit awkward if I start talking… ha…im moving here, it’s a bit awkward for me. 





M:	Deciding between skill/partner visa option. 



J:	I think it’s faster than the skilled migrant scheme, but I think at the end it doesn’t end up really saving a lot of time. Partner – he think we should do it soon as possible because with the skilled migration scheme I have to wait for the actual graduation. So that’s why we think that this probably is faster. So he think it would be great if we do it asap because with the skilled migration scheme, although I know agricultural scientist is up therte, who knows, they might change it next year. So its easier and more straight forward if I just go through the partner visa. 



M:	Next steps?



J:	Ha! I haven’t really think about it because I have two (no idea). Mostly its because its not happening yet. So I applied last year on feb and so I cant do anything on the system until feb next year. Until Feb 2020. They will ask for more documentation on how your relationship is going on. I think nowadays, most of the stuff is already online, They send us email buying flight tixm, buying something else – they always send you a receipt. So its easy to go back. I just domnt want to think about it at the moment. Oh another I want to put out there. I don’t think I can, I don’t know where to put on the map but I think, its – ofcourse it’s a logical reason that I want to do the partner visa first because it is faster than the skilled migrant. But then at the same time I feel I am going through this process which is general for everyone including non-skilled migrants. So I feel like, yeah I could have done it in a faster way but then at the same time, I feel its not appreciating what I have to offer. I feel I can actually contribute so much more to the society but then going through the process I feel im just a general person. They don’t care about me PhD they don’t care about my publications. But then if IU go through the skilled migration scheme, then they would definitely look into that things. Its not really, I mean, at the end Im going through the same result but then… 



M:	Are you planning to sponsor any family?



J:	That would be really really long term because im not even a PR yet. For my parents, I definitely have thought about it but they are not really keen on doing that because they have their connections and family and everything in HK and they don’t really speak English as well as I do. But I don’t think its very difficult to bring them to Australia because its, partially, because my mum has a very good career in a flight company. So shs working in the airlines so she gets discounted tickets which is – she onlyu need to pay 10% of original price to come here or go back so I think to me in my mind, its not that difficult for them to visit even if they want and they can have their own life in HK which they enjoy so its fine. I think my mom and dad have little biut of worry for my brother who is going to graduate from uni in Hk. They really want to actually go out and see the world rather than limiting his vision in Hk. But I mean iuts upto my brother, I mean it would be great if he can move here and then I can acyually help him with all this processes. If he ever consider coming here that would be great and I really miss the family connection here – that would be great.



M:	Are your providing migration advice to anybody? Have people come to you?



J:	They haven’t come to me. I just provide unsolicited advice. Well, I have my friends because Im a phd studene, I have like my cohort of students that’s arriving the same time and are finishing at the same time and many of them are considering to stay. So, I just – because I look at all these other options when I decided im going through partner visa so I kin d of give them advice – there are all these options that you can consider if you want to stay. I did give them some ideas because I really want them to stay because I have some friends around me. 



M:	Considered elsewhere?



J:	I have thought about it. I actually went to Europe for a month last Feb. So, during this time I was visiting some of the collaborator on my research and then they did mention that they have a position available and that I can consider if I want to come and they are quite happy iof I am on board with it. But then I like my life in Australia and I am not the kind who is moving a lot so I think its quite tiring to change the lifestyle once your settled. And then also all those countries that I mean, I went to Europe, so they don’t really speak English as easily as in Australia. So, I think culturally its too much of difference, so I don’t want to move. I have considered the situation of my own career. I also want to say in Australia the postdoc is paying quite well compared to – so the salary is not as good as Australia. Also culture wise, I have thought of language barrier is one of the major considerations over there. Also, a major part of it is if its accessible to Asian food. In parra for eg there are a lot of choices. 



M:	Future plans?



J:	Umm.. maybe I’m just thinking about career at the moment bevause I don’t have a kid at the moment. Maybe in the long term buying a house. (don’t want to put in the map)



M:	Most significant things on the map



J:	Choice for migrating here – this will be major one. Getting a phd here is also very major thing, and then which I actually really enjoy because I have a very good support here as a phd student here and I have a very good supervisor that actually give me a very good idea of what I want for my career.



M:	How is the mapping activity make you feel?



J:	I actually never thought that I have think about all this stuff when I was moving here but then mapping it made me realise there is a lot of stuff I have considered or go through in moving here, its interesting. Its like looking at my life map for last several years.M:	When did you first migrate to Australia?



A: 	I first arrived on the 31st of Feb 2013. For Studies. So when I was deciding to do my Masters I was between thinking of going to the UK or to Australia, and Australia was an option because one of the researchers that I was working with in Mexico, he was from the UK. He was working on this project on the sustainable use of water and I was telling him that I wanted to do the Master and I was thinking to go to the UK and Australia. And mostly, I was more inclined to the UK actually. But then he said, you know hes been to Australia actually its better to go to Australia. Again, location wise, it might be different but consider that the quality of life. So, for me, that life quality of life bit convinced me more for Australia. And I also was with my partner at the time who was also thinking to do his PhD in Australia. So my decision to come to Australia was, yea, I would say, it was studies – but it was also influenced in a way, by my partner, and yeah – the researcher.





M:	Your ethnic background?



A:	Mexican



M:	Work? In professional field?



A:	Yes – it is. My bachelor was in communication. I started to work with this national program within the area of culinary culture and that’s when I decided to shift to sustainability and environment. Yeah, I did my masters and it was a little bit difficult to change coming from background of communication. I’m working at the moment in a consultancy and I’m a sustainability consultant. So I work with, umm, ESG issues – its environmental, social and governance issues and at the moment we are working with umm, on this modern slavery issue. 



M:	How long did you consider/plan your move. 



A:	Well, I always knew that I wanted to do my Masters somewhere else. Like from secondary school, I always knew that I wanted to do my masters in another country. When I was working there I think it took me about, probably about a year, the planning and all that. I mean since the moment I thought, okay Australia its going to be, yeah about a year. Probably a little bit less. Probably less. But yeah, thinking about it and talking with my family and all that took about a year. 



M:	Why overseas?	

		

A:	I think it was because of my dad. So, my dad – he did his PhD in the UK. So, I think I always wanted to do postgraduate studies somewhere else. Also, I wanted to have the international experience of studying somewhere else. And I always was very inclined to travel. 





M:	Okay – tell me about family. 



A:	So, I will say that my family – core family is my mom, my dad, and my brother. So, for them it was obviously, you know, it was a bit sad. It was like, can’t you study in Mexico? But they were very supportive, and they knew that it was something that I… they always knew that it was something that I wanted to travel – and live somewhere else and they were very supportive in that area. 



I need to talk a lot with them and I think technology helps a lot to make things easier. Especially when I was, well, when I first arrived to Australia, I was deciding to go – I mean deciding which university I wanted to go… I didn’t know I was actually going to do it or not. But at the end my mom was.. you know.. talking with her on the phone all the time, helped a lot to decide things. 



M:	Did you know that you were going to live here?



A:	I think I was… deep deep inside, I knew that I wanted to give it a try to stay here. 



M:	Family/friends/community?



A:	Well, my partner. He was going to start his PhD so he was here 3 months before me. 



M:	And which types of visa options did you consider?



A:	No it was Tourist visa. The initial plan was that I was just going to be on the tourist visa for 6 months while deciding which university I was going to go to, get used to life in Australia, and practicing English and all that. That look longer than I expected so I ended up with a 1year tourist visa. In Mexico we don’t have that working holiday. Some countries have it but we don’t have that so yeah. Well, at least not that I know. So, yeah it was Tourist visa for a year and then I had the student visa, and then after I finished, I had the postgraduate visa, and then I was on a bridging visa and then the residence. 



M:	Factors that help make decision in one year?



A:	I was considering prices – big issue! And yea, the studies – plan and structure. So I started the Master in Melbourne and I did 1 year in Monash and then I realised I didn’t like it. I didn’t like it because I thought that it was too much money for the kind of education, I thought it was very poor education for the amount of money I was paying. Not saying that all of the courses – no. That particular Master had a lot of people that moved out. They just went to different universities. Yeah, and again in other places it was absolutely great. Maybe it was just that particular Master. I don’t know. Because yeah, my generation, people I started with, there were 4 people, they moved to Melbourne uni and from the generation before, there were 3 people at Melbourne uni. I was actually thinking about going to Melbourne uni as well. But then, I decided to go to Canberra to ANU partly because, well, my partner was in Canberra. He was doing his PhD there all the time. But it was not the motivation. It was also because ANU was going to be the only university that was going to transfer my credits. Otherwise, if I went to Melb uni, I would have to do an extra semester or something like that and I was like, umm, I don’t want to pay anymore. So that’s why I went to Canberra.



M:	Activities on the tourist visa



A:	I was travelling. I was studying English. I was doing this English course in ANU. 



M:	How long did the visa process take?



A:	The Tourist visa took like a month. The student visa less than a month. Very quick actually. I also had to leave – I originally asked for a 6-month tourist visa and they gave me a tourist visa for one year with the condition of leaving Australia after 6 months. So, I had to – yeah, after 6 months I went to NZ – travelled a little bit and came back. I’m not sure if I had to leave Australia to apply for the student visa. I can’t remember. I’m not sure. Oh no, I did apply from outside. 



M:	Skills?



A:	Well work experience and the theory in education. So, I think those 2 factors. Well, the education I had from Mexico, the work experience I had from Mexico and then the education I had here. Those things gave me the skills on paper to get the job in the area I wanted. 

Work in Mexico – it was all bits and pieces but the one that I was using for PR purposes was I was in a consultancy that worked in the implementation of a national program for the national commission of water in Mexico and the aim of the program was to teach farmers in different areas – was to give them entrepreneurial skills. The long-term purpose of that was to make sustainable use of water in agriculture and the means to do that was giving them the entrepreneurial skills. 





M:	Mapping



A:	So first it was – yeah, the tourist visa. Then, student visa, and yeah. So that was – I had this for 1 year (2013). I got this – so I first arrived to Australia on Dec 2013 – and then I got this on the 9th of December. Again, I got in December – because I was going to start in January – the study. The postgrad work visa – I got that in 2016 – And this one I got in 2018. Postgrad work visa - I got it for 2 years. So I finished my studies in 2016. So I got this in 2017. So during the Postgrad visa, applied for PR, didn’t have to finish it. There was actually something in Canberra at that moment – a particular skill that they needed in Project management. And I was a bit afraid of applying under this position. I was like I don’t know if I have all the information, not feeling very secure about it. My ex was like, just apply, this is the moment for applying because there won’t be another opportunity and a friend – a friend from Mexico is married with a girl who was working at the department of immigration and she was also recommending – you know, this is going to be changing every 6 months. So, it’s either apply now, or it would be an opportunity lost. 



M:	Commercial services



A:	So there’s this place that is called Latin Australia education and it’s a free service for people in Latin countries. Of course they get a fee for every student they send in Australian universities. So, yeah they helped me with all the initial bits for applying for the tourist visa to the stduejnt visa – they helped me with all that. They even helped me when I was looking for an internship. So, I think this one was extremely useful for me. After finishing Masters, I was already with the Residence and I was getting a hard time to get a job in my area because its mostly all in communication and I wanted to leave that field. I wanted to go into environmental sustainability, and I was looking for an internship that would give me an entrance to help me with that. So, this Latin Australia education helped me with that.  So, they helped me with tourist visa, with the student visa. With the postgraduate visa, I got a service from the lawyer from the university. They have lawyers and they don’t give you.. they don’t give you… umm they’re just a guide. So they help you and they helped with the residence as well. So I mostly used these 2. Didn’t have to pay for any of these services. The only moment when I paid was when I went to a lawyer and it was for a specific question, but it was a very very specific set of questions. It was while applying for the residence, and before submitting the documents and all that because the lawyers from the university were guiding in the process but they don’t make any formal recommendations. So I just had a question, or couple of questions about checking papers, checking everything was right. So, I went with this lawyer – I paid $300. 



M:	Other services



A:	Yes – document translation services – that I used one of the… for the Tourist visa, I did that in Mexico. For the student visa, I already had this from Mexico so didn’t need this. So student visa I needed the IELTS, Translation services. Postgraduate visa – I needed the IELTS again, police check (hmm did I need a police check for student visa? Question mark) – I had to do it in Mexico and in Australia. I had to do actually the IELTS – I did the IELTS 2 times for the student visa because I didn’t get the score. So, yes 3 times in total. Yeah, for the residence I didn’t have to do anything. Yeah, for the student visa I had to do the IELTS. When I transferred to ANU, they told me that they could, they didn’t, I didn’t need to do an IELTS again because you were already studying a year in Australia so that can count as IELTS. For the bridging visa – the bridging visa they just gave when I applied so that’s just automatic. Translation every time – yeah, because there were different things. For the student visa, it was, of course it was education and all the universities in Mexico. For the residence, I had to do the translation of the birth certificates, of the things that I didn’t have to do for the student, and for the Postgraduate I had to do the translation. There was something that I had to do that was different. It was just that one thing maybe. Umm but yeah, for the residence I had to translate a crazy amount of documents, even emails. At one point the guy who was translating was like, aah, you again! The translation for the residence was with someone from NAATI, umm yeah, and that was in Canberra. Skill assessment – oh yea right, skill. For the postgraduate visa, I just had to show that I had finished an Australian qualification, and they give it to you for the same amount of time that you had the student visa. Umm and it’s just for postgraduate studies so it’s just Master and PhD. 



M:	Financial services



A:	Yes – that was actually for the Tourist visa as well. It was just showing bank account for the tourist visa. And for the student visa, I was paying it myself, and my dad because I didn’t want the scholarship to go back to Mexico. And if I got the scholarship, I would have got that from a city that is very high leves of violence at the moment. So I didn’t wanna go particularly to that city. So I talked with my parents and they were like it might just be better to… we’ll just pay it and you can pay it back to me later. So, anyway, for the student visa we used financial services and it was, how do you say that, It was not a bank but it was when you make the transfer from Mexico to Australia and the moment when the dollar is the best rate, that’s when they send the money. Depending on the amount of money you transfer, the fee is a percentage. I don’t know… like 5-10%. That was for paying the fees. So, showing that you had sufficient funds, yeah, I needed that for tourist and student but for paying the fees for Master I had to use that. We didn’t want to use banks because they – its just too expensive and the cheapest option, that I learnt from a friend, was to use this. This transfer service. Oh the health and all that. I don’t think I had to do it for the Tourist visa. Let me see how much I can remember. The IELTS is $300-$350. Yeah, Ill have to check. 



M:	Challenges?



A:	The skills assessment because I wanted to.. so I had the translation and I ask a friend in Mexico to back up the information I was giving. Well, I was working with him when I was in Mexico. So for skills assessment, like, it was not Science or anything – it was experience in Project Management, he had to write, yes I worked with her, this is was we were doing, bla bla bla.. and that was yeah, I think the skills assessment was particularly challenging to prove and translate all that and to get the people from you know, years ago, when you worked in something, you know years ago to help you with all these requirements. Yeah, that was.. And yeah, the IELTS that I didn’t have the first time. I think with the IELTS it is so frustrating so be sitting there for 4 hours and after fist hour I was like, ahh, and then not meeting all the points for the student visa, its like, ahh, ill have to do it again. But yeah, the IELTS was more a mental thing. The skills assessment was time consuming, hassle. 

I took classes for IELTS in Mexico. So I took classes for the IELTS when I was applying for the student visa but I took that in Mexico so it didn’t help a lot, really. [The English classes on tourist visa] – it was from ANU. It was.. to be honest… it was mostly for.. sort of, to do something. Not to be.. to feel like I was gonna be here for 6 months and not do anything. If you don’t pass the IELTS, you have to do it. But I wanted to do the IELTS. The English classes were not with that purpose. If that was for that purpose, then I think I would have done it differently. But yea, those were more like casual sort of. 







M:	Technology



A:	So, this is going to be online research which of course, I think this was for everything. I don’t have social media, so I didn’t use that. Applications, all that etc. Mostly it was online research and this .. the Latin Australian education. Google searches, Department of Immigration. For the Tourist visa, I did stuff online and because these guys helped me – the Latin Australian, they helped me, I didn’t do much online for that. 

Forums – there was a Mexican forum, something that is tailored to Mexican people so that was for the residence. And student visa, not really. 

So, WhatsApp and skype for chatting with my family. I used telegram for a while but not a lot of people use it so not anymore. Telegram was better before. WhatsApp now is encrypted by telegram before, it was, the safest option. You know to avoid; in case you were hacked and all that, you know, your conversations. Not that I have a reason for these issues but… laughs. My conversations will be like, chatting about food all the time. So yeah, WhatsApp, skype, Facetime. 



M:	Social connections



A:	So before coming here, I knew my boyfriend at the time. Then, before tourist visa… well… after the tourist visa I started to have this group of friends who were in the English class and after the student visa, that’s when I started. Like, the friends before arriving, was mainly like my ex’s group of friends. So, it was mostly like his friends and his group. He met some people through like meetups, and they became good friends, and like, we also became good friends. Oh, Meetups is technology. I think for these 2 visas I was relying on this (the latin Australian group) because they were helpful, and it was free. And I just really found it extremely useful. Like it was very easy to, like, very holistic sort of thing. I didn’t have to do much. After that, for the post-graduate and the residence, that’s when I started relying on the social – heavily because when I was in Canberra, I was .. the group of friends that I had were also going through the residence process as well and there was lot of knowledge that was not a part of online research or something like. When I was telling you about the wife of this friend who was working in the dept of immigration, who was saying like, okay this is the moment for you to apply, double check this, not from a professional perspective but from a, like, friend-ish perspective. It was like ‘I know something. I won’t tell you what it is but I recommend you to do this at this moment.’ Also, I was babysitting at the time and the people that I met during … the clients and all that, were a part of the Mexican community, well, Latin community and they were extremely supportive for everything. So, when I was applying for the residence and the postgraduate visa, they were sharing experiences they had which was helpful.



M:	How is it affecting family?



A:	My dad has his nostalgic moments, of, ahh you should come back. And I’m like (smiles) no. But my mom, actually, the other day. My mom has said several times that she’s happy that I’m here because she feels safer and I don’t know, like, the other day there was a robbery close to my house or something and there was a kidnapper, something bla bla bla and my mother has said, you know, these are the times I feel more relaxed that you’re safe there and you don’t have the same dangers as in Mexico. So, living is aside. I mean the distance and all that is hard, but I think they’re okay. 





M:	Regulatory aspects / Challenges



A:	Besides the skills assessment? Well, talking about health. So, it was just something on my health that I had to double check and it didn’t have. Let’s say, it was not that it was challenging but I just had to extra double check for applying, you know, the residence. And yea, it was just, I think it was the only thing that was on my mind. It was just internal, like, I was just extremely stressed about certain things, as in, what if there was something not in my knowledge, super stressed like, do I need to do more things, do I need to do more checks, and I was just, particularly stressed about that for the postgraduate and the residence. And the stupid IELTS that I had to do twice. 



M:	Are you keeping on top of current immigration policies?



A:	I want to say yes. They have affected my migration. My general – one of the points that I have is that Australia relies a lot on immigration of course but the economical dependence they have on Education facilitates for immigrants to come and do studies. Im gonna leave the quality of education and accepting everyone aside – but it makes very quick things, at least in my opinion, for students. I also think that they are double checking certain visa’s like the 475 when it comes to you know, cases of, they need to make sure that there are no human rights violated. So, I think of course that’s a good thing. In 2017 or 2018 when they were going to change the requirements for residence and for the citizenship. That was, of course it came out of the blue and I was going through the process of the residence and I think I submitted the application like a week before that or something like that. So, the good thing was that I was sort of relaxed that I put that EOI before that happened, and then I was doing the residence I was affected by all these changes that they were doing. I was wondering how this is going to affect me. That’s one of the reasons why I went to the lawyer – how is this going to be affecting me... just double checking that it is going to be fine. It didn’t affect me because they didn’t do any changes at the end. So, I was doing the process when they announced and I was like, ah, this is going to affect me. But because I had the EOI before, it didn’t affect me and then at the end they didn’t change anything. For the citizenship, if, well, I guess all those changes affect in how the pressure you feel to do things now. So for the citizenship, my pressure was, like I need to do this NOW before they change the requirements to be 4 years as a resident. Other than that, no, I wasn’t affected. 





M:	Challenges



A:	Absolutely. I think until I got the residence I was stressed all the time… all the time and its like when you’re relaxing for a moment but at the back of your head youre thinking, ‘I should be doing something’. It is like, the migration process for me was, I felt like I never had settlement. I feel like I was constantly pursuing something and that instability, it was, like I was stressed about I don’t know whats going to happen, and then at one point, it was okay I’ve been enough in Australia and if I don’t get the residence, I don’t think that I can go back home and get used to that lifestyle again. So, yes, it was very challenging all the time because even when you’re a student your thinking about, I knew that I wanted to apply for the residence, so it was like a long time of carrying the stress.



M:	Examples of migration advice



A:	Well, so well, friends wife. But also for using the NAATI – the translation services, specific people were recommended by the social groups. Like, this guy might be able to do it faster or this girl is particularly good for translating this. Its kind of ironic because they are all certified and they should all be able to do it but anyways… A friend was saying apply for your driving license and things that prove that you are a part of community and that you’re making your life in Australia, that you’re integrating yourself. So, those kind of things were part of the recommendations. Also, well the lawyers, he was recommended by somebody. There were several lawyers, of course, but in the case of this Latin group, lot of those people went to this guy. There were some people who went with other people but apparently they didn’t have a good experience and that’s the knowledge that they also shared – so like, go to this lawyer because he’s good at this. Also, one of the lawyers from the university, umm there were 2 lawyers. One of them was helping my ex with some of his documents as well but the girl who was a friend of a friend, a close friend of mine. So there was also that, like she would go the extra mile, like you know as in, everything was part of a professional but it was also like, okay I wont tell you this but as a friend of a friend I will tell you, you know.. do this, this is better or don’t do that..I think that it was all generally good advice. Especially going with the lawyer that I went because if I had gone with a different one – I was in a very vulnerable point. I think that any advice the lawyer would have given me at the time, I would have taken. And that lawyer would have said okay do this and Ill charge you for this this this – I would have said yes okay. And going with this person was like okay, I said that you’re recommended by all these people. So yeah, It was like, there was no need for adding pressure of ‘you need to pay for extra things’. So yeah. He just happens to be married with a woman who is in that community group. So, then again, he has a lot of experience with Mexicans and all that but also there were other people who had bad experiences with other people. 



M:	Multiple migration options?



A:	Yes, I was considering the partner visa when I was in the postgraduate. So one of the things that I was considering was that if I didn’t get the residence, and this was suggested by my ex. He was still on the student visa for his PhD. So, he said okay of the residence doesn’t happen or if there’s an issue, the partner visa is an option. I can be with the student visa and then post-graduate visa of his. Yeah, that was the other possibility. I didn’t want that possibility but of course I considered it. In the case that I didn’t get the residence, I thought okay, that might be an option. I didn’t want to depend on someone. Things can go wrong or they can go well but I didn’t want, like I wanted to be with someone because I wanted to be with someone. Not because of migration status. There’s a layer of that. What if I want to break up but I’d have to be with him to maintain my migration status. 



M:	Next steps?



A:	I applied for citizenship 2 weeks ago and that’s it. Family don’t have interest in coming here at all. Visiting yea. I don’t think my dad – because he thinks hes too old. My mom def wants to come. When my brother wanted to do his Masters, he was considering Sydney. At the end he decided not. I thought, not about sponsoring him, but I thought it might be easier to help you with anything you need. But at the end he decided to go somewhere else but hes thinking about coming maybe and do a short course, like 3 months, in something he’s interested in.



M:	Have you given advice?



A:	I have but because this is being recorded and you know that its fined by law if you give migration advice and if you’re not a lawyer. So yes, I have given advice to my brother and several friends. Like a lot of friends. Particularly a group friends who are looking for immigration. There are several friends who are going through the process in Canberra and because I got it they are asking me, and every time that something happens in a positive way, they let me know. Also friends who are studying and thinking about applying for a different visa (it might not be residence) but other visas. 



M:	Would you move elsewhere?



A:	Absolutely. No I love Australia. I wanna stay here all my life (sarcastic laugh). If the opportunity comes up then I would definitely consider because I think there are lots of , not better, but different opportunities to learn from different places. Australia still gives me.. because its an Island, I feel that things are very contained and that sense of feeling like, you know like an Ostrich, having your head in the ground. Sometimes I am dealing with these kinds of people and it feels quite restraining at times. I actually think I would love to go to NZ for a year. I would also maybe like to go to somewhere in Europe. I was thinking about maybe a PhD in Finland or something but yeah, it depends. But yes, somewhere in Europe. Not to live all the time but to have that experience of working there. For a change.



M:	Life plans?



A:	I know that I should be thinking about that and bla bla bla to maybe have that stability. But Im not actually interested at all in looking for that right now. I don’t want to buy a house right now because first I don’t have the money. But, even if I had the money I would buy it as an investment but I don’t because I know that I don’t wanna stay for a long time in Sydney and I don’t know if Im gonna stay in Australia or something. I didn’t look into that. The citizenship would be important because the passport gives you the opportunity to go to other places. The Mexican passport doesn’t give you that opportunity for a lot of places and what I want to do is not just travel for the sake of travel. I want to do certain work in my field. It’s more like a career thing and I think there’s more opportunity with an Australian passport. You can also have the opportunity with a Mexican passport, but you would have to do extra work. 





M:	Reasons for move between cities



A:	Canberra was for my ex-boyfriend – well love. Melbourne was education. It was my decision so I was like you suck it up. Like it would be sad – you will be sad, I will be sad but we will be sad together. This was like, I think I had the bridging visa for 3 months. They gave me the residence after 3 months of applying. Yeah, it was really lucky as well. Sydney was for job. I applied for the internship through them (LA) and I also wanted to move out of Canberra. Like Canberra was great and I had a great time there, but it was like a bubble. Australia already feels like a bubble and it was a bubble within the bubble. So, I was like, yeah I need to move. I moved here for the internship, but I was going to Canberra a lot over the weekends and all that, so I wasn’t that much in Sydney really. Yeah I started living in Sydney properly when I started to work this job in September. All this will be worth it to get the citizenship to get the passport to be able to leave. All this so I can leave. laughs. 



M:	Thoughts on the map



A:	It looks like a lot. I was also thinking of that when I was applying for the citizenship. The amount of money spent in everything is just, it’s crazy. I could have had 3 houses by now. But as I said, it feels like part of your life journey has been filling forms and paying things to fill more forms. That’s what I was feeling like when I was applying for these visas and the map. It’s not challenging but the amount of time it takes.M:	When did you migrate to Australia?



N:	2018, end of January 2018



M:	Motivations?



N:	So, my husband got a job in Australia when we were living in Singapore. So we moved here with his job, sort of, migrated here for the job. We had the option to stay in Singapore. He could have continued to look for jobs in Singapore or move here with his job and I can ask my company to move me here. Umm. Why we decided Australia over Singapore? Couple of things – I think the first and the foremost was about visa. So, Singapore’s visa and PR laws are very very difficult. Almost all Indians are not getting their PR in this point of time, and the work visa is only for 2 years. So, renewing your work visa is difficult and company sponsoring work visa is difficult as well. Australia from that point – our work visa is for 4 years so it was more comfortable and in that process we can apply for PR and Australia as a country is more open to sponsoring PR for Indians. 



M:	Right, Okay. So your intentions of living in Singapore were also to get PR at some point?



N:	We don’t want to go back to India. We want to live outside and needed some sort of flexibility and some sort of, confirmation, I guess, that we will not be chucked out of a country if we don’t have PR. So some stability there. 



M:	Why not India?



N:	I think couple of reasons – a. employment opportunities, pay scale is much better outside of India and safety is a very big thing for me. I used to live in New Delhi and I don’t think it’s a very safe city for girls. So, I think that and obviously cleanliness, and standard of living I think is much better outside. 



M:	Professional background?



N:	Yes – so Im in HR and that’s where Im working currently, and I used to be a recruiter back in India and then moved in to recruiter cum HR generalist role. I’ve studied back in India with a Masters in HR, and yes I’m currently pursuing that in my career.So, I was working for the same company in India and then in Singapore and they just moved me here in Australia so its primarily the same company that I’ve been working for for 6 years. They just moved me here. 



M:	Was that easy?



N:	It was – because Ive always handled Asia Pacific in my role. So, I handled Singapore and Australia both. So Singapore, Australia was still part of my role. That’s why they could move me here. With Australia the reason they moved me was because they didn’t have to sponsor my visa. I’m dependent on my husbands visa so it was primarily just moving me from one entity to the other and just move me on salaries, and that’s it. Had they – if they had to apply for my visa I don’t think they would have done that for Australia although they had applied for my visa in Singapore. It would have been a tough one because I’ll tell you something. We did try to migrate somebody from the US entity to Australia and Australia had some specific laws on x amount of dollars that you should spend on training to be eligible as a sponsorer, which we don’t do because we have a really small team in Australia. So I think it would have been tough. 



M:	How long did you consider/plan your migration?



N:	I think it wasn’t very long because when my husband got the offer from the company – Obviously, that’s when the decision phase happened. Should we accept it or not. So, it was about going back and forth to move. So once he accepted, everything was taken care of by his company. We really didn’t have to do anything except for closing all our…closing our chapter in Singapore and moving here. Maybe 3-4 months – and they took care of our visa and everything. So, really we didn’t have to do anything. We just had to pack our stuff and move out. 



M:	Did he actively pursue this job?



N:	He just got the offer from the company because the recruiter reached out to him in Linkedin but he was really excited because it was one of his dream companies. 



M:	Did you think about other visa options?



N:	No because I’ve been to Australia once before. I moved here for work. My husband had never been to Australia. So, it was also an opportunity to see if we like it, if it will work out. We have the work visa for 4 years so we could just wait and see if its actually a place where we want to live to apply for PR or not. We were never going to just apply – I mean, we haven’t applied for PR yet. 



M:	When did you come to Australia before?



N:	2016 or 17 for work for a couple of days in Sydney.



M:	Did you conduct any research on moving here?



N:	Yes obviously a lot of research online. I think the first thing was really on compensation to see what is the trend of compensation and cost of living comparison between Singapore and Australia. Both for my partners job and my job as well. Anyway, Im in HR so I had to see what it… how does it translate. I have a cousin here so we did reach out to him a couple of times to ask what he thinks about Australia, living in Australia, challenges, things like that. I also had a friend here who moved from India so I did reach out her to ask how life is, how expensive things are here, housing, rental etc. 







M:	Tell me about your family and their role?



N:	So my parents are the ones that probably influenced us the most and I remember when we told my dad about it, he was was ecstatic. He had been to Australia before. He loved Australia and he said absolutely go for it. My sister lives in the US so my parents are very open about sending us outside. So, he was all up for it. My mom on the other hand wasn’t very happy about it because she wanted us to be close to India and Singapore is very close to India. So, although career wise she was very happy for my husband but not for the fact that we will go away proximity wise. My husbands family was completely supportive of whatever decision we took. Moms consideration – cheaper flights, shorter flight duration – so yeah. 



M:	Other community networks here?



N:	No – not at all. So, I personally didn’t know anyone expect for, like I said, that one friend who has now moved to Singapore from here and that family that we had here. I didn’t know anyone else here. When we were making the decision and going back and forth, it did play a big role because Im a social person. I have a lot of friends in Singapore and I knew that I wouldn’t know anyone here so it was a tough call because that did play a factor but in the end, that was the trade-off. 



M:	How long did the initial visa process take?



N:	So, we had a situation here. When the visa process actually started with the company, we were not married. So, the option was either we apply right away as a de-facto partner or we wait to get married and then once we have a marriage certificate, we apply as husband and wife. The visa agents recommended that we do, we get married and then apply. So, once we had the offer, we actually did not apply. We just collected some documents, and I wanna say in maybe 3 months, and then we applied only after we got married. 



M:	Did this push your decision to get married?



N:	It was always happening. We had the dates, we had everything done. So, even during the interview process, even before we had the offer, the timeline was set very firmly with the company to say that any move will only happen after we get married, and whatever time the visa takes and all that so we would consider that. The second consideration also was that we were actually renting an apartment in Singapore and we were already tied in that contract till Feb. So, we had requested that any move only comes after that. 



M:	Interested in your move in Singapore?



N:	I knew him before moving to Singapore. I met him in India but my plan to move to Singapore was already in place before I met him in the sense that I wanted to move out of India. I had started interviewing in companies in Singapore – other recruitment firms to see what the job market is like because a lot of my friends and colleagues from x company had moved to Singapore. I had travelled to Singapore a lot of times with my job so it was an attractive place to work from and I wanted to move there. So anyways, those interviews were going on. I did get some offers and then when I started dating my husband now, I did also start a conversation with my company to say I want to move there. And that’s what happened. They were able to move me in the beginning of 2017. I start5ed the discussion in 2016, and he was able to move there as well with be because we were kind getting serious in the relationship and he had his own company at the time, which he could easily operate from in Singapore. For me, it was my company and because we were married, he couldn’t be a dependant, and Singapore doesn’t move on de-facto. So, he was sponsored by his own company. 



M:	How long in Singapore?



N:	1 year. We lived there for one entire year. We didn’t have any plan to move out because my visa was valid for 2 years and he had started looking out for new jobs at the end of the year. Then, obviously this Australian company happened. 



M:	How do you consider yourself to be skilled?



N:	Me, specifically – So I am not talking about my partner here? I think the skills that I have, which is currently about my career is mostly recruitment, HR, employment law is what I work on and the fact that I have experience across regions. I not only handle one country. I handle 6 different countries in my role. So, I think thats a good skill that I have, which I haven’t seen a lot in Sydney or Australia. Everyone in the same field has usually or more often only just handle Australia in HR, and that’s also most probably because Singapore is considered a headquarter for such roles where they are handling a broader region of more than one country. I think, that’s where I have that skill. So, my skill is still listed in the long, is it long? – as a long-term skill but there is a problem there. What Australia considers skills for HR manager, I don’t fulfil that because of them the team size should be bigger than the team that I currently handle. So, as per Australia’s definition or skills definition, I actually fit into the HR adviser role which is a much more junior role than I’m at so I don’t fit in to an HR manager role. 



M:	Mapping



M:	Point of initial status to now. 



N:	Employment pass – so there are two categories: the student pass and employment pass, and for employment pass there is pre-requisite for the dollar value that you are paid. You’ll only get an employment pass if you’re on $6000 Singapore a month. 

So my visa took a lot of time to come for processing from Singapore. That’s because, again, my company was really small and their details were not registered with the government. So they came back with a lot of questions. My partners visa came much before my visa. We had actually moved to Singapore even before I had the visa. So I had already signed a contract with the company and I was off India payroll and on Singapore payroll already when we moved but I was travelling significantly for work in that first month. So, I was hardly in Singapore. So, technically and legally I started my contract with the Singapore entity when my visa came, which I think was the 11th of Feb and my visa process I think started in December. Before that – it was like a business visitor visa. So, I wasn’t getting paid anything. I only got paid once I had my visa. So when we had to sign the lease as well for the apartment, because we moved in, I couldn’t sign the lease as well because I didn’t have the E-pass that was needed. That was fine because my company had sponsored a month’s accommodation. So now, here [Australia]. So, processing time, the visa, when they applied for it, it actually came back in 5 days. We went for our honeymoon, we put in our documents, we were back in and we had the visa. I think that’s also because they [the company] are like a platinum sponsor or something like that. So, processing time just for visa was 7 days. And then a month to move after the visa came. 



M:	Commercial services?



N:	Maybe I’ll start with Australia. So, everything was sponsored by his company. So, we spoke with a lawyer, a migration lawyer/visa agent in Australia. So, we were on the call. We spoke with the tax consultant. The migration agent was a corporate one but not with his company. A corporation that they had tied up with. So, going forward if this company applies for a PR, they will use the same agency. Then we had a tax consultant just to ask about how taxes work, and any questions about that – so that was another agency, tax agency. And then there was – how do you call it – this person was part of the company who, what is that word called in companies where they help people migrate – Global mobility representative who was asking about what’s important for us, whats not and when he [husband] mentioned whether its easy for my wife to get a job, and answering such questions. And then there was this shipping company. Again, this was by them – another agency who was, who helped us understand if we need to ship anything, how much it will cost, and if it will be reimbursed by the company or we will need to pay for it. So, for this they had tie ups across the world so somebody came to see us in our Singapore house that we just need to see if you need to move anything. We also had some stuff back home in India that we wanted to move so again, same company’s counterpart in India also visited us. I don’t know the names of these companies. Obviously theres police check and all. So for shipping, in the end we took the option of shipping everything ourselves. We didn’t use this company because we didn’t have enough stuff to ship. We didn’t have, we were not moving furniture, and then were reimbursed by the company. Police check and all we did but again, we didn’t pay for it. We didn’t have to pay – I mean in Singapore you don’t have to pay for police check. Both Indian and Singaporean – both you don’t pay for. Its just a record that they give you when you go to them. We didn’t have pay anything. It was pretty straight-forward in Singapore for both of us. We just had to go and get our police check done and it was done in maybe an hour or something. In India, it was a bit more complicated. So, we did our police check and then we did the health check in India again. This was in India, and we paid for it but we got reimbursed by the company. We didn’t have do anything else – our documents were all in English. My husband didn’t have to give an English exam but he just had to show certificates to show that his education was all in English. So, we just got that certificate.



M:	Health Insurance?



N:	No – for the first year, his company paid for our health insurance. So, for every year after that we have to buy our own, but my company pays for health allowance for both of us. Private insurance is a requirement of our visa and we get that from my company. Okay so that’s agent when we came here. So She reached out to us as soon as we came here and asked us basic things of how many bedrooms we need, what is our budget, what area we like, what kind of people are we. She shortlisted some places for us and then we had a day booked for us to go look around. She did the – everything she did. We didn’t have to pay basically. And she is also from a partner firm employed by the company. And first month accommodation was taken care of by his company. 


M:	Cost?



N:	Nothing – we didn’t pay anything from our pocket. Nothing at all. We didn’t spend any money in anything in coming here. The air tickets for both of us were also paid by the company. So, nothing. Our dollar value spent was only for moving from Singapore back to India, and shopping. Visa process has been easy – I think that was really easy, I mean the visa. For me, getting the Singapore visa was tougher coz I had to do everything. Here, because the company was so organised, moving – the visa process and physical movement was easy. But when we came here, things were not easy because we were used to living in Singapore and things in Singapore are much much easier. Like apartment hunting as well. Here its – I mean over there, it’s a very buyer’s market. So, we could go and see the same apartment 5 times and they’d take our phone every time we’d make a call. Here you have to make the call the same day or else you lose it. Second thing, fully furnished apartment is a very common thing over there. Here, its not. So just, once we had the apartment just buying furniture and buying everything was a headache. Singapore is great in public transport. Here it is not that great. End-to-end connectivity is not there. We needed a car in the first few months so that was a big challenge itself. Bank account opening wasn’t also as easy as it was In Singapore. In Singapore, you go into a bank and I think in 5 minutes you have everything ready. Your credit card, your bank card, everything. Here, the bank account opening took a few hours and then for the credit card as well, we couldn’t get a credit card because we did not have any credit history and then even when we got one, we couldn’t get one which we could use to get points for our expenses that we did. So that was a bit challenging as well. 



M:	Technology



N:	So Social media mostly in terms of reading articles about, umm migration to Australia. There was a lot of information available on what you should be prepared for. Google. Then also about, I guess, compensation and benefits analysis through different. This was mostly through recruitment reports in terms of how much will it cost or how much the same role will get paid in Australia. Cost of living adjustments and that was also through payscale as well as online through google. Taxation because there was a lot of – the biggest thing for us was that there was a lot of difference within the taxation in Australia and in Singapore in corporate tax. So, just understanding how that might affect us in terms of compensation as well. [income] Not better off here although the income is slightly more than Singapore, but the taxation is much more – practically double. So, at the end our take home is much lower here than it was in Singapore. But, having said that again, there are pros and cons to be balanced here as well, in terms of how bit the role is and what we’re doing here and stuff. But yeah, the taxation is very very high. There’s some things that are more expensive in Singapore. There’s some things that are more expensive here.



M:	Tell me about personal dynamics?



N:	So it was very tough. We were settled in Singapore. We weren’t yet married and we were just looking forward to being in Singapore. I loved Singapore and there was no reason to move. We did get an opportunity but he was interviewing in Singapore as well. He would have got, if not.. as big a company but we would have got a job in Singapore as well. So, I was against it. We were not ready for it. We even went to a point and said, okay say no to the company. I think it was just, the more we talked, the more we asked people, the pros and cons, we realised that we’ll take it. Just for future stability, we’ll take the decision from the point of view of again, visa, if we plan to have a family, Australia is a better place to have a family, point of view of owning a house, owning a car – things that Singapore will never allow us, and in Australia those options are possible. I think the big thing was the weather Singapore’s weather is definitely not the best weather. Those reasons – we did go back and forth and even in the first year we weren’t sure that we made the right decision. 



M:	Role of social connections.



N:	I think just the cousin that we contacted. He was the only family that we had here. He had been here a really long time and his.. his take was, we live in paradise. I think that’s something that really, like, paradise, is what attracted us to consider okay it’s a great place to live, we have some support from family, We talked about opportunities, the country is so beautiful, a lot of things to do, and that sort of thing. Influencing social connection is just them. That’s all we had. Nobody else. 



M:	Settling.



N:	We love the country in terms of everything it has to offer. Yes, it is expensive. Yes our take home money is less than Singapore but then much more things here in terms of travel, in terms of exploring, in terms of learning. Its very multicultural. Learning new things. Its very outdoorsy. My husband is extremely outdoorsy so he loves the fact that hes able to cycle to work here. He goes for running and doing a marathon. I think I have learnt a lot here as well. I never drove in my life. Im driving now. The country has a lot to offer. Again, if you think of having a family and future, we definitely think we would like to bring our child in the world in this country rather than other places where we’ve been before. Will we always be in Australia? We’re still not sure on that because again I still love Singapore a lot so if, in the future, if we do happen to get a permanent residency for Australia, probably we’ll see if there is an opportunity to move back to Singapore just because I like the country and its closer to home. Maybe ill put my father on the map just because it was important that I spoke with him and he was extremely for Australia. So, that I think gave us the confidence and boost that we’re making the right decision. For both of us, I think we really look up to my father. He’s a businessman and is smart enough to make those decisions. So, we do look up to him.



M:	Thoughts on immigration policies?



N:	A little bit, like, not a lot. But a little bit because we are looking at applying for PR so changes in the skills from short-term, long-term, mid-term – how things are moving from there. So, a little bit. 



M:	Obstacles/Challenges



N:	I think the number 1 challenge is making the decision to move here. So decision making, whether we move here or not. There were some disagreements [between me and husband]. I really liked Singapore, There was no problem, I still had my visa, he would have got a job easily – his skillset is in demand. So, yeah, it was, that was the number 1 challenge. The second challenge, Im just gonna mention in terms of moving. Second was, I did know not know even till the visa process had started, if my company will move me here. [going back] I also researched about employment opportunities here. So, I had started talking to employment agencies here to see if I will get a job here. So that was the challenge before we moved here. Once we moved, I guess, should I write about things like not having a car/mobility. Also, not having enough funds in the beginning because we didn’t move all our funds to a different country. So, we had to really think about spending or where we were spending, bank, credit card, and just for everything – in terms of how the country operates, from transport to opal card to what you do – there was nobody to tell us that. So, I guess general country whereabouts. So, there was a lot of self research that we were doing about it. So, Although here I would say – his company, they had a portal where expats go and talk about different things on – whether its about opal card or its about your wife finding a job. I think that was a big thing because that portal has a lot going on about expats. So, in their internal portal, people post that – like my wife is looking for a job, bla bla. They also share experiences very very openly where they talk about x has happened, what’s going on, just very open. They do have meet-ups where people who don’t speak English, they meet up, and wives will meet up, so a lot of that is there. But that’s about it. There’s groups on Facebook and Social media where, I haave seen specifically, like Indians in Sydney, people looking for jobs and stuff. So, I’ve seen those groups as well. I am a part of this group om Facebook but I have don’t have any input on that group but I find out about anything that’s happening in Sydney – any event or anything. 



M:	NGOS/Social support?

N:	So when I moved here, I didn’t know anyone. I wanted to talk to people.. I wanted to meet more people and I did not have a job that consumed a lot of time. So, I became a part of volunteering organisations. So, the first thing I did was… this was last year… I went and registered myself with NSW volunteering group where there was a training, they just talked about what volunteering is. I had to go and get a working with children check done so I got that done, and there was a police check done as well, so got both done, and with that I currently volunteer with 2 groups – one is St Vincent for youth. So basically, they have events planned every month or every 2 months for youth. They only cater to children, who are from a disturbed family. So, refugees or anyone who has domestic violence in the family, or their parents are disturbed. So, they just take this kids to a move, or a park or something and we just have to be with the kids for the day as volunteers. I do that sometimes. And then Im also part of NSW volunteering but the Lane Cove or the city council which is community service. So, there is somebody in an aged care facility that I go visit twice a month. So, I enjoy meeting this aged care person a lot more than the youth part, because it’s a one-on-one meeting. He has a lot of, hes going through demetia, so he doesn’t remember anything after he meets me. But its still good – I enjoy it. 



M:	Given any migration advice?



N:	No – because Im in recruitment, because that’s my profession, I would say a lot of Indians, specifically, who have moved here on a PR, they reach out to me on Linkedin a lot for jobs and career advise and opportunities but that’s about it. 



M:	Any advise that did not work out?



N:	Yes – its an easy go, it’s a wonderful place, everything is really easy here – but it wasn’t. It wasn’t. 



M:	Next steps?



N:	The next steps would be to get a PR. We are working towards that. My husband needs to be the primary applicant because of his skillset. So we’re working on his skills assessment, and hes collecting documents for that currently and then he has to give an English exam as well. I think for the longest time we were waiting for his company to apply because after 2 years, his company could apply for our PR but that comes with a bond of some time that he still has to work there and we have to share the cost. So, there’s a percentage that we have to also pay. Whereas, if he applied on his own then theres no bond and we don’t know if the laws are going to change so we don’t want to be waiting for that. So, he started the process. Obviously if we have the company to apply, the process would have been easier but hes still working on it. I think he should be able to apply for his skills assessment in the next 2 weeks and then study for his English exam. This has been very challenging because he had to get documents from India which is not easy for all the employers, the letters that they are asking for. He has worked for a company that has been taken over twice. So its very difficult for him to get documentation from that first company that no longer exists. So, that’s one of the challenges. He had his own company as well which got dissolved so getting documentation for that is very difficult. So, his paperwork collection for skills assessment is very difficult. I cant do it as a primary applicant as well because, like I said, Im an HR manager but here I only get identified as a HR adviser. So, this is a bit of a task here.



M:	Migration elsewhere?



N:	We could – I mean Singapore is one of them definitely. Just because of my husbands skill set, he gets a lot of opportunities from the big tech firms in San Francisco and he’s been saying no because we still want to figure it out here. But, perhaps that could be an option and that’s just because the market in that area is booking for the talent that my husband has. So, maybe US. 



M:	Future?



N:	This is after I have received a PR. So, we definitely want to buy a house here. We will think about starting a family, upgrade our car, maybe that. I think that’s the most immediate stuff that we are planning to do. Current challenges on map – skills assessment. I think still in terms of social circle. So friends, family, and for me it’s also I think, the lack of work colleagues. I have a very small team here and I don’t have any HR circle here. So, from a work perspective, I do attend a lot of talks and seminars and HR meet-ups to know more people, meet up with agencies and stuff. I try to do that a lot. Friends, So we do participate a lot in these meetups with my husband’s company where we meet and go for different events but that’s about it. No so I mentioned driver’s license, that’s one of the requirements here. Right now, we don’t have one. The next sept would be to get a Drivers licence. For both of us. Were both currently allowed to drive on our Indian licenses, but we need an Australian licence. If his company applies, we will still have to pay for skills assessment. So that’s the trade-ff as well. And, because were currently not going through any migration lawyer or an agent to do this, this company will go through the lawyer who’s fees also we will have to split on top of the PR cost. I honestly think we will end up spending the same amount if we do it ourselves of if we do it through them. Of course, the difference will be that the processing time will be much lower considering it took 7 days to get the visa. Im sure the PR will be much faster and the documentation would be less. That’s it.M:	When did you first migrate to Australia?



Do:	It was on 2016. Around this time of the year, July?



M:	And what were the motivations behind your move? Like, what were the main factors that you considered in making the decision?



Do:	Um, so at that time I'm yeah, I wanted to do a master's degree. So, it was studying, personal growth, professional development. So yeah, I was in a moment in my life at that point where I had like a really stable job, but I knew that I couldn't, like, move forward. So, I kind of felt that I hit that barrier. I couldn't develop myself more. And I ended up around a relationship. And so it was like that time of like I was really looking into, like going into something new.



M:	Tell me about your ethnic, ethnic background. Ethnic. 



Do:	So, I'm from Chile. So, it's like, Latin American in general background. 



M:	And your professional background as well. So, what type of work did you do before and what do you do currently? Is it in the same field?



Do:	Okay, so My background is on psychology. I'm a psychologist. Back in Chile, I worked as a clinical psychologist so I was registered with children and teenagers, especially, and I, my my main job was at a school, but not in clinical psychology, but more of like, like personal growth and development activities with teenagers and as well, like year 10, 11 and 12. So yeah, like community projects and personal development projects. So, those were like my main two jobs and what I'm doing here I can't, I'm not practicing as a psychologist so my my degrees not I have to validate it if I want to work as a psychologist and to work as a clinical psychologist is even more difficult than just certifying that I'm like a regular psychologist. Yeah. So it's a long process and so yeah, I'm not doing that I'm just studying and doing work related to uni right now like academic teaching and working in completely different areas. 



M:	And what are you are you planning to then become, get get accredited here in terms of practicing clinical psychology? 



Do:	I'm, I'm still thinking about it, and I'm not sure yet. I know that that's a pathway for me to staying here because what I'm doing now the PhD and the Masters even, if like they are related to psychology, they're not the kinds of postgraduate programs that certify that I'm like, that I can go through that like, get the training as a clinical psychologist or as a psycho.. like plain psychologist. They want acknowledge that as such. 



M:	Why did you choose to come to Australia?



Do:	So I was after something very particular. So I was looking for a master's degree for a while in Chile. And I wasn't sure like, if I wanted to invest money and time, in that I want like wanted to be really sure what I wanted. So, I came into positive psychology through like some online courses and some workshops in Chile. And I found like when I did that I, I found that like that was the thing that I wanted to do. And then when I started searching programs, there were few places that had a master's degree on positive psychology and Australia was one of them. And when I looked into the program and the CD, particularly in Melbourne, it made sense because… so positive psychology is related to well-being and like good quality of life and Melbourne at that time, had like I don't know, like five years in a row being like the most lovable city in the world and the program… I liked the way it was structured. So, it was it had like more face to face interaction. And that was I was, I was looking for that.



M:	And then did you end up coming into that program or..



Do:	Yeah, so that was like my first choice. So I, I applied first to, to this one.



M:	And before like before you actually came, I mean, you talked about the process of it, but how long in terms of time? Did you consider and plan your like move? Prior to move?



Do:	Probably over a year.



M:	And in terms of the year, what were you doing? Like were you just looking at different destinations or visa options or?



Do:	So yeah, first I started because I enrolled in both online courses and workshops that I mentioned. Then I started doing some research online looking into programs and see what was available and then finding out like, when to apply, the requirements, which included the English tests and all that. So that was Yeah, maybe one year. Little bit more between like the intention of starting doing moving along that path up to that first time that I came to Melbourne.



M:	How did you learn about the options that were available to you like what kind of research Did you conduct was it through your own research was it through networks as well?



Do:	My own research… going, like internet looking for stuff. And one website led me to the other. And then I started mapping the different programs and like different levels. So there were a couple of diplomas in Chile and Latin America. But then I wanted a master's degree. So, there were like, at the moment four maybe universities offering that and then like looking into that, like, the websites and then looking into the Cities as well. Like, where I, I could visualize myself living, and yeah, and then yeah, so it was by myself, that first stage. Yeah, and then the second stage when I had like everything more clear. I, I got advice from from an education agency. 



M:	Oh, you did? Yeah. And this was back home the agency or okay. Right. Okay. So we'll talk about that a little bit more later on as well. Tell me about your family and their role in your move.



Do:	Okay, so my family is mom and dad. I'm the only daughter so I don't have any brothers or sisters. So, they were really supportive, I guess, especially my dad, because he had the experience, the same experience a long time ago before I was born. So he moved to the states right again. and, and he had, like some great opportunities as well. And my mom came along with him. So he was like, totally supportive of that.



M:	And did you have any family friends or community here before you moved? And did that affect your decision to migrate 



Do:	So I think I was lucky last night I had one friend over here. So, at that time, I think he was maybe he he had been living here for a couple of years with his partner and then I became friends with his partner as well. So, and yeah, so that I think helped it made…It made everything more more easier like to because I had a place where to arrive. So I, yeah, the first time that I came here I and I've been living with… had been living with them at different stages of this whole process. So, they have been like a key support.



M:	Oh, that's great. And they're still here. They're still here. Yeah. Okay, great, awesome. And any other sort of community or friends or that was the kind of main



Do:	Well, there's a Chilean community here, a big one. So, it was helpful for me to

get into the Facebook groups. So there are several Facebook groups to get information about like basic stuff to get get around here. But as I had my friends as well, here, they had like a lot of advice, like, firsthand. So that Chilean community was helpful, but it was more Secondary I think. The online community. 



M:	Now, did you consider different types of visa processes? Or visas? Or were you kind of set on just studying?



Do:	just studying…because the first time that I'm, that I came here, I thought, okay, I'm doing a master's and then I'm going back home. And, in fact, the school that I was working at... So at that time, I thought that I, I could bring what I what I learned from the masters and apply it in that school. And then later on, I realized that it was not the environment. So I had like a permanent contract, and it was a really stable and good job. So, the first time I didn't consider anything else because I was supposed to just go back. And then things changed.



M:	So how long did your visa process take?



Do:	The first one, Um, it was it was quick. So, the first time that I came here, it was on a tourist visa. So, to complete an English course, before the Masters, because the proficiency tests, I had like a couple of issues with the score. So, the easiest thing was to come here and take that program. So because of the length of the course I couldn't apply for a student visa. I had to apply for a tourist visa and as well because I came here first to take that course and then went back to Chile, finished my my job for that year, resigned and then came back to study. So this initial visa was probably one week. It was fast. Yeah so I had to take the course at that time of the year which was between July and October. Otherwise because the next program the next course was was almost overlapping with the beginning of the masters and I needed to have like all the paperwork done before the master started because they needed to know whether I was enrolling or not. 



M:	And this English course was it a proficiency? Was it a requirement of the course or the visa?



Do:	The course the course. Yeah, the masters. 



M:	Okay. And just in terms of.. this this question is sort of a key aspect of this research in terms of skilled visa processes. Do you consider yourself to be a skilled migrant? And if so, how?



Do:	So yeah, I can be a skilled, I could be considered as a skilled migrant. As I told you before. I'm a clinical psychologist over there, but I haven't practiced here. And it's been a while so I'm aware that my registration, I don't know how it matches. So probably, I would need to take some training to in order to get the certification and go along that pathway. And the other pathway is, I think, as a lecturer or something like that related to to uni. So potentially that could be another pathway. But I don't know how easy, like what what are the real chances of getting like any of those.



M:	Right? Okay. Alright, well, we'll move on to nothing. And then all of these kind of questions will discuss a little bit more detail. And so you've got everything here. This recording will continue. So we just talk while we draw. So, okay, so tell me about all of the visa categories. in your mouth, you went through from the point of your initial arrival to your current status, including the wait times, processing times and any bridging visas.



Do:	So, the first visa was a tourist visa and this was in 2016. Okay, so this was July to the first days of October 2016. Okay, so this was our one-week processing time. And after that, I have the student visa 1 and that was from… I think it was granted in December, January, but I got here in February. So this was February 2017 to March 2018. And then this was maybe the same… one week. They were really quick, at least at the beginning. Then from this visa, I had a bridging visa, and this was in March. I don't remember how quick this was. I remember it was very nerve wracking because I didn't know… since like, the first visa, the first student visa was over. And then I went into this bridging visa to get another tourist visa. But because I went through a process from December 2017 until until March, early March to try to get another student visa and in the end I couldn't do it. Because…Because of uni. So yeah, while I was doing the Masters, I decided that I wanted to do a PhD. So I applied while I was doing the masters. And I, I got the response that I was accepted in January. So, my research the PhD is in Education about my research is on yoga and wellbeing. So what I wanted to do I because I knew that I couldn't start the PhD until I got the fundings the scholarship, so that wouldn't happen until the second semester. So, I needed to defer the offer anyway. But I managed to save some money. So, and I wanted to do something in between. And I also… I wanted to stay because that you… Like this whole thing of coming and going, it's like it was no good. So, I… I wanted to do yoga teacher training program. But the thing is that it was tricky because according to the framework of education in Australia it was like going backwards, not forwards can guess it was from a Master's to Diploma, and not at uni, it was just an institute. But anyway, I, I gathered everything that I needed I I went to several migration agents. And the last one, they were like, really supportive. They told me this is really really rare to do. But your letter of intention is really good. Like you have a really clear case and I had the support from my supervisor as well saying that in which ways that would benefit my project. But in the end, there was one document that I needed from the university to present to immigration. And when I went to the office to talk to this person at uni to get that document, she told me that she couldn't give me the document. And and that if I intended to apply for that other course, and I defer the offer for the PhD, I was putting at risk my placement here at the uni, the PhD and I could lose it because I was like, there was like some conditions that they said that I couldn't take any course in between, before starting the PhD. So they basically told me that it was the end. So, I couldn't move along forward with my plan because I was putting at risk, what I really wanted to do and it was harder for me to get another spot for for a PhD, rather than maybe doing the training some other time, during the PhD or afterwards, so I had to change my plans. And this was like, maybe within two or three months that I had to get my head around it. Yeah, and then going into the bridging visa and then going into a tourist visa so I could stay a little bit longer. Mainly because I thought maybe I would be able to stay with a tourist visa if I like maybe stay three months here and then because usually the visas are for like one year and you have to go in and out. So I was trying to figure out how to work on that. Finally, after the bridging visa, they, they they gave me the I go to visa for not three months but two. So that was a tourist visa. And so at that time, I had a partner as well so that as well like motivated me to stay a little bit longer. So, then I stayed here as a tourist, and stayed for a conference, which was on positive education and it was linked with what I was doing. But yeah, so they they granted me a visa for less than three months, which is rare. It's really rare. Yeah. So yeah, and after that, so tourist visa, and that was from from March, I think I went into the bridging visa just for maybe one week. So maybe I think this was around two weeks, waiting. And then I got this one [tourist visa] from March until May 2018. This was two weeks. So, then I went back to Chile after the tourist visa. I had to leave. I couldn't stay anymore. So, I did the Masters with a scholarship and I'm doing the PhD with with a scholarship as well. So, because it's like, crazy expensive, so I didn't have I didn't have the scholarship at that time. So, while I was on the tourist visa, I applied for the scholarship and I got the results in late June while I was back in Chile. So basically waiting to be to hear back about the scholarship. So, when I went back home here between this visa and the visa that I'm now on that was like four months in between. And I left half of my stuff here hoping to come back again [laughs]. Took a leap of faith.  So yeah, and then the student students student visa number number two. So, this was tourist visa number one. And then tourist visa number 2. I got this be granted on August, but I couldn't get here at that time because I had to sort things out for the scholarship first. So I got here on September 2018. And I think that goes until 2023. This was maybe two weeks processing. So this was, like quick, they didn't take too long. 



M:	So tell me about the commercial services that you used in your migration journey from your first visa to your stage now. And this includes agents lawyers, career consultants, document translation services skill assessment service. Is any language tests or internships or anything that you basically pay for? 



Do:	Okay, so I didn't pay for anything. So when I…when I got this visa. So I knew what course I wanted to take. And yeah, so I could apply… I could have applied directly to the university but they were charging a fee or something. So, and you know, like being far away it was a little bit can be daunting because like you don't know how what to do. You cant talk to anyone on the phone, you cant physically go there. So this agency it was an education Agency. They’re Australian. So it's called kangaroo. So they’re Australian but they're based in different locations. And then there's another one as well – I cant remember. So since I applied to uni through them, they helped me with everything else. So, they basically helped me complete the visa form and getting all my paperwork organized. And I had the documents already translated. So yeah, so they they are based in another city and …not in my in my hometown city. So yeah, everything like was on the phone and online. Right. So, this was for this one and then I think…yeah so they helped me with the second one. I remember taking a photo at the office like, yay we made it, “another happy student flying to Australia”. So they get paid from the Australian Government and the university. So yeah. So they helped me with this first stage and then…These one's I did it on my own. But since I had another plan here, which didn't work, so I'm just going to bracket it. So, it was going to be student visa but failed for diploma on yoga so here I got I've lost count. Like really like it was so exhausting. I went to so many different migration offices. So, I went to education agencies and migration consultants and finally, one. I cant remember the name, stellar migration I think. So, they were the ones that supported me. They read the documents, I went into the office, I had everything ready, but then the university killed that dream. So, what I finally did was this for that conference. So this was the English course. So, they they helped me with this but then since we didn't we couldn't do anything else. They supported me to apply for the other visa because this is really rare as well, going to the student visa to a tourist visa… they usually don't grant those kind of visas because they want you to just you studied, finished, move on. If you’re not studying again, like move on. So, I'm So but in the end, I actually went into the office again because this is like another story. They they were like not an education agency but a Migration Agency. And because of statistics and things like that, they didn't want to, like, charge me for the service and like, so they told me Yeah, like you can come in to the office, complete the form, like beforehand, and we can check it here and you, with your computer, submit the application. They didn't want to do it. Because if if I got the visa rejected it what it would go into their statistics and they didn't want to mess up that, But they still wanted to help me. Like, they still wanted to help me. So it was weird. But so I went into the office with my computer, and then I submitted the visa. So it is on my own. And that was the first one that I did on my own. And then in Chile this [PhD] one I did it on my on my own as well. All of these ones for from Chile except this one, this one So this was from Australia. I was happy to do it again. I just didn't want to mess it up. Yeah, yeah. So they just helped me like they read the letter. They made suggestions. Like maybe you can put these or not put this. So they gave me suggestions from from an officer, migration officer point of view. Yeah, so like, those kind of things and what documents to support, like upload and stuff like that. Yeah. So it was really helpful in the end.



M:	And how did you learn about these services? Like was it through electro example going to that agency Did somebody told you about it?



Do:	Yeah, actually this one, I got it from a friend who got it from another friend. So I first started with education agencies, and then I ended up with a migration agent. So yeah, so this was first and then since this didn't work, I went the other way.  Before the tourist visa number one did an IELTS test. But afterwards, no, because since I already did the masters and it was within that timeframe. were like okay, I completed a higher education degree in English. I still had the I don't know but I like the language skills to go into PhD without Language Proficiency Test.  so yeah they I got an offer letter from the university conditional to the language and then this one that we saw now on like the letter that I got, it was unconditional. So it was like you're welcome to start whenever you you want but with this one year so before this… I it was like the preparation stage maybe. So the prep I I took the the TOEFL not the IELTS. I took it twice. Times two. So the first one I didn't prepare myself I just went because the dates were coming where I had to apply for uni and I just did it. So I got the score that I the overall score that I needed to apply. So the overall score was was okay. But the writing was below the required so it was 25 out of 30 and they required at least 27 so it was almost a perfect score. So, what I did then with this results, I applied for the Master of Applied Positive Psychology. So, then I applied I got the unconditional , no the conditional letter saying that I had to take the test again or doing that English bridging program. So, I took the test again and I had an overall score was much higher. So, the overall score is like 120 I had 110 something like that, but again the writing of the writing again 25 out of 30 Oh, and I and I prepared for that. So, it was insane. I didn’t understood why and because the first time the the report wasn't sent directly to uni. The second time I made sure that the report was sent directly to uni. And because I checked that box, I wasn't able to ask for review. So yeah, I was fucked up. That's another like big industry like, yeah, you make money. Like, I don't remember how much but it's probably like, at least $200 each time. And the course, I don't remember, it was quite expensive. I don't know, but maybe between maybe 2000 and $4,000. So the good thing is that within all this process, because the the, the tests were required for the university, but for the scholarship as well, to demonstrate that I had a decent level of of English to get the scholarship. So, when I when I enrolled in the English course I, I still didn't know if whether I was going to get the scholarship or not. So I again I took a leap of faith and said, Okay, I'm doing this anyway. I was very determined, and I paid from my pocket for that course. And I think it was one week before departing, that I found out that I got the scholarship. So then I got the money refunded for the course. And they covered one ticket because they want to cover a ticket to come here and then returning. There's a lot of things that that that they cover. And yeah, so great. That's why I ended up taking that course.



M:	Was that course helpful?



Do:	So Yeah, actually, It was helpful, but it was designed for people that really, like need to upskill, and I already had prepared, like my writing skills. And I was feeling really confident with that, but it wasn't reflected in the score. So, when I got here the first time I told myself okay, I'm going to take the most out of this because I'm, I asked for it and it was a big issue at the school where I was working at because I had to ask for a leave of absence for three months. And people didn't like that. So yeah, it was like so hard. So much effort put into that, that I when I arrived here, it was like okay, this course better be good and worth it and I learn something out of it. And then when I when I started, I, I realized that the group that I was in, most of the people needed a lower score. So, they, so they tried to bring you to the, to what the university requires. So, for me it was getting, like 70%. And for the rest of the course of my classmates, it was like 60%. So that the difference between, like my skill set and the skill set of the rest of the group were like, not levelled. And then I got a lot of support from from my teacher. as well. So she tried to adapt some things. And I also try to engage in other stuff so I could really make the most out of the course. But then the problem was that we didn't get enough feedback, because the course was designed like that. And it was really frustrating because I was getting my, my assignments back with nothing on them. And it was like, Yeah, good job. You got 73 Okay, but there's room for improvement or like, again, like I'm, I'm here just for this and it has cost me a lot of effort. So, I want to learn something. I need to know what to Improve and that permeated to my classmates as well. And then I found out about issues that were going on at the institute, like big issues and and then there was like a big, like, we started talking and and, yeah i'm i'm really I get…when I see unfair things going on around me I get like activated, motivated and start doing stuff and I started talking and then, at the end anyone like the..It was clear to me at the end that it was a business. So, they were failing students, just like for example, if they had to pass with a 60, they were fading them with 59 or 58 with no reason, like no proper feedback on how to improve or why they were failing. So, it was very disappointing for me and I remember questioning myself whether I had made the right choice because all over that Institute where the logos from this. University and I got like really paranoid at one point because since I was like, speaking out, and everyone wanted me to speak for them, I thought at one point like, I'm not going to get into this In the course or, or or if this is not working well, maybe the Masters is not good and like, Is it worth it? I got into that whole, like, dilemma. But anyway, then I find out that during that year, the institute had gone back independent. The uni locals were there just for for a while. So that's the story about the course. 



M:	Tell me about the role of technology in your journey from the initial stage to your current status. So online research, how did you conduct it? Where did you conduct it?? What kind of resources did you use any use of social media avenues, for example, like Facebook and stuff like that? 



Do:	So, so this is preparation just start using colors. So this is the preparation stage. So yeah here was online research mainly, like official websites from uni, mainly, um, and this was from home, my personal computer and I remember there was an open day with this university, and they had online resources like, you could talk to students. I remember Yeah. So they had I don't remember how that was called. But like online chat.  And then I got Yeah, like recommendations of which suburbs to be living, like university life. Yeah. more practical stuff. And then yeah, the official websites for the programs and things like that. Well, okay for the visas obviously you have to use the immiaccount. Social media for what I was telling you about like Facebook mainly, the Chilean group - that's another one of Latin women. The Chilean group organize… they organize a couple of events throughout the year so remember to going to a couple but I'm not really like that engaged in those groups. So, social connections so friends, family, greater community in your migration journey from initial stages to current status. So any people or any, any connections that you want to reflect on your map. So I told you about my friends here so they were actually, well, the friend that I know back from from uni, back from Chile during the preparation process. So yeah, that's my friend that was living in Melbourne. So yeah, this was key because during the preparation process, and then when I got this visa as well, I stayed with them. So, I lived with them together for for three months. Yeah and the other the other day we were talking about this. My friend went back to Chile while I was living here, and I didn't meet his partner until that time. So we were kind of getting to know each other and, and my friend left and he left us both living together and he was like, Okay, get to know each other, be friends fast, and we got along like really, really well. I remember the first day that we were alone, like we we talked for hours like getting to know each other's and yeah, like it was a really good relationship. And then yeah, so I lived with them for three months. And then I went back. So, this is like least gaps, like a lagoon, back to Chile for October, October, November, December, yeah four months. So it was like this like, hopping from here, four months there finished my job and then I realized I wanted to quit and came back - student visa. And here it was really difficult to find a place to move in by myself again and when the student visa expired again my friends appeared along the way and here again lived together for March, April, three months again. Back to Chile - again four months, four and five. So here, and then here Chile, here and here guess what again. This time, October, November, December, January, February – five months. So, they've been like key. And I have other friendships as well. But between like this movements coming back and forth, I've lost connection with some people and it really takes time and effort to reconnect with people that you didn't see over those periods of time and I made friends here but then some of them have gone away. So, it's like, I'm not really seeing anyone from this time from the English course from the map…Yes, I still have friends from the from the masters and they have been as well as a couple of them, like, really supportive along the way. And the people from from the restaurant were at work and that has been another source of support as well. That has saved my life with friends and money. I started as a volunteer but then I started working there and in times of need, It has been key. So I had a partner. So I met my partner while I was studying here. So now it’s ex partner. So I met him here. And then we kept seeing, going through the bridging, through the tourist, and when I went back to Chile, and when I got here, and then it's really messy. And here we broke up - heartbroken. Yeah. So that finished. So, I decided to go into the PhD before knowing him. Like, actually, I was on the whole process of submitting the application when I met him. So, I already like my made by my mind about that. But then he influenced me trying to stay over that period. But it wasn't, he was, wasn't the only reason why I tried to do that. It was just I let go of everything that connected me this Chile at that point - When I resigned my job, I sold my stuff, rented my apartment. So it was like, Okay, I'm releasing everything and I'm just focusing on something here. Yeah. So, but yeah, he totally influenced that process of trying to stay as well, like me trying to make sense of what I wanted to do in between, because I knew that if I… if I was going back, even in like after the first student visa ended, I was going to be in Chile, like transitioning, like no job, and as a psychologist, what what I could have done at the moment was clinical psychology, which is not very ethical to do if you don't know how long you're staying because you're making connections with your clients and you cannot like, abandon them. And I couldn't go like into another job because I knew that I was leaving. So it was kind of messy as well. It was really unstable. Lots of uncertainty. last year 2018. 



M:	Any regulatory aspects of migration that you have to fulfill at any of these stages, so for example, government requirements, so please check so character tests to health requirements or any other sort of regulatory stuff that you had to do..



Do:	Just paid for the overseas cover. But I didn't get any, any calls for a medical check or And. They, they say that they can require it. But I think for what for my country, it depends like for example for my friends, they they asked them, but I think it was because it was another kind of visa - working holiday. And in my case, they didn't ask anything - any of those visas, none, just pay for the insurance, It was covered but it is covered by but the same thing with the - visa you have to pay from your pocket, and then they reimburse you reimburse you. so Overseas health cover 1, overseas health cover 2, and then this one, which was the most expensive one, and the scholarship just covers like, they don't pay everything at once, so they pay per year, But I have to pay it at once. For every visa I had to demonstrate that I had money basically as well as the financial. Yeah with that with like proving like I have a scholarship - This is how much I'm getting, like an allowance. So to demonstrate that I was able to sustain myself while I was living here. So for every visa, even the tourist visa - Financial Statements the bank or scholarship or whatever, Yeah. and and the the GTE the genuine temporary entrant criteria. Saying that If I was in trouble, I have friends and I can stay here and there. When I did the process with the agency, they asked for everything like not only the scholarship because like, the more the better in this case, yeah. So, that you had a backup plan or whatever.



M:	Have you found yourself in a situation where you've given migration advice to people?



Do:	Yes. People from the restaurant. So, there's a lot of people that come to the restaurant to work that are on working holiday visas or tourist visa or student visas, and then they find themselves in that transition. So yeah, mainly with like some advice, if they ask like in terms of the application process, but mostly for the, the letters. How to write the letters. The statement of intent, the GTE stuff. 



M:	And tell me about any issues you faced in regards to your advice. Any advice that you received? Did you ever receive like, I don't know bad advice or any challenges or obstacles Otherwise apart from the ones that we've discussed already.



Do:	So, just in this process when I, when I wanted to do the thing in between the master and the PhD, I went through a lot of agencies and they gave me completely different advices, and I just noticed that they had their own agenda. So, they offered me like different courses like they told me - one agency told me no, that's not the pathway. It's better if you take an English course again, and we happen to offer like this one. Okay, no I'm not doing that then another agency. Yeah, you can do but maybe it's better if you apply first for another masters and then go into the PhD and we happen to work with this university. So, things like that. It was really, really confusing. Like to make the right decision and that's why I moved then from an education agency to a migration so that they had like a different perspective on things and particular agency had an education, division and migration with lawyers and everything. So yeah, that was confusing. bad advice. 



M:	I suppose let's let's talk about the next steps in your migration process. What are you working towards and how are you working towards it?



Do:	So, I know it seems so far away but I know that time is going to move quickly so into the Future – happy little cloud. From here what I'm thinking… I know that I can apply for the graduate visa and I think there's a there are two streams. I went to a workshop maybe a couple of months ago about this and and they explained these two streams…i'm not sure i think they need to go to migration agent and that's I have it in my to do list. Yeah. So I can know beforehand what's the best option but I know that with this visa, I should be able to stay the same period of time that I studied, and that would provide, like enough working experience to go into PR. But I don't know. And, and again, like what…What's the best pathway for me to follow? That's still unclear. 



M:	yeah. Are you planning to sponsor any family members to migrate here in the future?



Do:	I don't know. I don't know if my family would consider…maybe my mom would consider it. Not so sure about my dad. But that's too far away. Maybe it's far away. 



M:	Would you consider migration elsewhere outside of Australia? If so, why? And how would you go about it?



Do:	Yeah, I would consider it if I cannot find a pathway here, and I have a better option outside overseas. Yeah, I would consider it. The only country that comes to my mind is Canada? Like? Yeah, like a real, like more tangible option option here because other countries are are getting as closed as Australia. yeah, like just for tourist visa right now the process is much more longer than what I did before. This is like from experience my mom coming here so, the visa took maybe three weeks to come through and it was her first visa so it should have been easier and for a friend the same thing, and they are asking, like a lot of things so if we're tourist visas, they're getting like tougher, what to expect for other visas. don't know what's going to happen. So one challenge that I didn't mention and it arised here on my current visa, and it's related to the Health Cover, insurance, So I was sick in. I got sick at the end of the beginning of April, end of March, and I had to go to hospital and the Health Cover like there this little part like you usually don't read it, or you don't think about these things on the whole process. Because I have had so many other health covers but this one, It hasn't been a year from since the Health Cover has been working for. So, so they don't automatically cover everything for health issues, and there were a lot of things that I didn't know at the time when I had to go to hospital because you're you're sick so you can't like start searching on the internet or talking to someone on the phone so I had to pay money when I when I went to the hospital. So, it is covered but since I haven't been in Australia for it's been less than a year… they, they, they use the right of assessing everything to see whether it is like a condition that pre-existence or if it's a real emergency kind of stuff. And yeah, that's it's been a long process. So, I still from April, I still haven't been refunded the whole amount of money that I paid. That's kind of been kind of stressful as well. Like, on top of being sick and getting recovered. Like this whole uncertainty of Am I going to get paid or not making phone calls, emails and everything. So yeah, that's been challenging as well. 



M:	How do you feel after drawing? I mean, now that you've drawn a map, how do you feel about your map?



Do:	Well, it's pretty much like, like, this whole journey has been, it's been like really messy and a lot of things going on.M:	When did you first arrive to Australia?



Cl:	The very first time to Australia – it was in 2000. That was a working holiday visa. I was here for maybe 10 or 10.5 months. 



M:	Is that when you decided you wanted to come back?



Cl:	I don’t think in that time, no. I really loved every minute of being in Australia and the travel experience. But going. I would say when I left, I didn’t know how much I love it. So I left Australia – I didn’t have much experience of travel, and I didn’t have much comparison. So, I left Australia, I lived in many other countries so I felt like I really would love to live here. 


M:	Motivations for visit first time and later?



Cl:	So the first time, I would say, it was an intuitive thing. I was working. When I was 16, I really wanted to go travelling. But I was in – you know the school system, you have to study till your 18-19, and my mother convinced me that its better to finish school and then go travelling. But then by the time I finished school, I sort of forgot about it. I completely forgot about it. I was totally in this mindset of oh, I need to do something with my life, like a career or… and so I ended up working first and then I met 2 people, who had, they were much older. And they ended up telling me about their travel experiences and it totally clicked, and I just knew that I had to go to Australia. It’s not just they told me about Australia. Actually one was Canadian and he came to Europe when he was young and the other one had a brother in Australia. But, he was more talking about I should go out and see the world instead of thinking of my career. For me these were significant people. So that was the first time and yeah, people keep asking me why Australia and it was just a 100% clear to me. There was no doubt about it. Yeah, there was just no doubt about it. 



The second time was when for me it crystallised. So, that’s many years later. I had a career. I studied, I had a career at the university where I come from. And then I felt like a bit of a dissatisfaction. And I went to a coach, a life coach who I had a couple of sessions with, and it came out that I want to do some things, I wanted to do a PhD. I love intellectual work. I love intellectual academic environment, but I was in the management at the time, not the research part of it. And the second was I wanted to go back to Australia and the third was I wanted to do research in India. And then I just applied for a position in Australia as well as in the UK. UK because of my research interest in India and it worked out here in Sydney. 



My professional background. So, I studied Bachelor of Anthropology and Psychology and Tourism slash Geography. This led me to work at University, like the project manager for the president. One of the universities back home. I had various jobs during my studies as well. It’s quite a common thing to work and study, and yeah, so. Surely, what – I mean part of what gained me the position here in Australia was my experience in management as Project manager. It’s like a professional management. 



On the WHV – both. I was doing both. But, everything was cheaper. I came with some money in my pocket but my plan was to stay 3 months because I couldn’t imagine I could stay longer away from my family. Laughs. So, I came here, and you know the big difference was – so one thing was like there were many more Irish and British people backpacking. So it wasn’t much Italian, French. I don’t even know if they could have this working holiday thing at the time. But yeah, so in terms of professional life, you know, I was just working, “working” as, you know, just a bit of cleaning, or like housekeeping, at the reception. Some houses would give out free food so I would give out free food to the backpackers and that would gain me a free night. So, everything was way cheaper than now. So the only job that would make me the money was as a waitress in Rushcutters bay. In Sydney I came to stay for 3 months to have this job. 



M:	What type of work currently?



Cl:	In my professional field – I work as a university tutor in social science. 



M:	How long did you consider/plan migration both times?



Cl:	So, the first one – I was say from plan to execution was maybe 3 months. That’s only a rough estimate. Im not sure if that’s correct information but I believe to remember that the WHV for Germans just came out around that time because in 2000 was the Olympics. And I remember that I thought that I was really lucky that we have this visa. So, yeah, that was the first. The second I would say was a much longer start. I mean, where would I start. I would say that from applying for the Phd, I would say a year earlier maybe. 



M:	Migration options?



Cl:	I mean for me, how to say this. My aim wasn’t migrating. I mean, I wanted to move to Australia – yes. No there weren’t other options – I wanted to come to Australia. I mean I didn’t come on the study visa. I first came on the tourist visa. 



M:	The second time?



Cl:	The second time and then I, coz I already quit my job. I put everything in one cart. I said to myself if they don’t like me, I have to change my life. Not going to stay where I am now. So, I quit my job anyway and I decided to come to Australia anyway and get the tourist visa. And I was travelling in Western Australia for like, 3 months I think and then I heard that they accepted my application and that they also fund my studies. Coz that was my primary… if they don’t fund my studies then I am not gonna put money down for it. And that was like a long process - to actually get the position and to get money for the position – that was my condition from my side. I’m gonna pay for the studies. 



My PhD project was like – I came up with the entire thing. And so I was determined to find the person to supervise it. That’s why I also applied to the UK. And yeah, in a way, ofcourse I checked out different options but that was all done before I put in the applications. I only put in the applications where I knew the supervisor wants to supervise me and support my application coz theres no point of doing this if theres no one there who wants me. 



M:	What about the UK?



Cl:	[Laughs] – So that was 3 universities in the UK. So, one person actually came back a year later. I don’t know what happens with my emails there. So this person actually became my examiner. So, still this connection was quite important. But, anyway, by the time I was like, it’s a bit late [laughs]. Thanks for accepting but… And the other one, well, the reply was a bit vague. It was like, along the lines, I would have to do first a Masters and then they would accept me as a PhD student and I said no way, like, I am not gonna do a Masters degree especially when they dont fund it. Like, they said that they would fund my PhD research but they would not fund my Masters. That wasn’t an option.





M:	Family? Did they play a role?



Cl:	It was my decision. 



M:	Any family/friends/community?



Cl:	No I had no family, friends or community so that didn’t affect my decision. 



M:	How long did your visa process take?



Cl:	I mean I always thought it was relatively quick. I cant say, umm, maybe a month, maybe a few weeks, yeah.



M:	How do you consider yourself to be a skilled migrant?



Cl:	Well, umm, I think I have so many skills. Ofcourse, they are CV skills as I call them. But there are – now theres a new set of skills, the visa skills. And ofcourse I have many other skills that are not, you know, that are not on a CV or, you know, like everyone’s life skills.



M:	Mapping



Cl:	I think I actually don’t have to draw this in a time-line. So, umm, I would say, yeah, I had this working holiday, umm, so processing times – I would say 1 month because fun fact – no internet at the time. You know, you have to send it as a paper application. So, no internet application and you had to send your passport in for the visa. 1999-2000, yeah. Not entirely sure. I mean I remember I came in October. I arrive in October 2000 so it was actually 2000, maybe March. So working holiday – okay and then we are talking 2012. So that was a Tourist visa. I cant tell you the time, I cant remember. That was all done via internet, online application. That was 6 months and then I think there was not any bridging visa. Then I had the study visa. 



M:	Was it onshore?



Cl:	I think so, yes because I came back. So that was oct to maybe feb, I was on the tourist visa. But in January, I went back home. I had to sort some life stuff but yeah im pretty sure I came back on the tourist visa and then I applied the study visa onshore and then I had the study visa for a couple of years. I mean I had this – what was the name of this – I had the extension so that was 1 year. Feb 2017, so it would be Feb 2018. And then I had a. Theres something about September. So the longest processing time was the 485. All these study visas, that was in a couple of weeks. But the 485, I think that was like 3 months or so. No sorry, I forgot one visa. Now I know why September. So I submitted September 2017 and when you submit, you have to apply for another visa, and that was the visa that I had. But did I then have the bridging visa? So I extended – that was feb 2017. I think it was 4 years and then I extended but I didn’t need the entire year because I submitted in September and then Im not sure what happened in Sept. I think I might have applied for 485 but then it puts me like, 1.5 years before I get it and that can’t be correct. I had something else in there. Or, I still was on that 1 year extension. Anyway the 485 was the longest – the longest and the most complicated – for me personally. 



M:	Commercial services



Cl:	So I can say, first time I really paid a migration agent for information is.. so one was in my early study visa. So, that was these guys. I paid a $100 and it was shit information. Laughs. No – don’t use this guys. They were really shit.  Then commercial actually just came for me again relatively recently when it came to my 485. So I had one consultation, lets say post phd. So at that time I was really sure that the 485 is the best option or not and the second consultation was relatively recent one. It was post 485 because it was about, okay, how do I actually come to PR and that is, I can say is 2018-2019. So I had my IELTS language test on Feb 2018. That’s for the 485. Then I had.. the other IELTS test was in 2011-2012… 2012? I did 2 IELTS. That’s the language. I didn’t do a skills assessment yet. I mean, yeah, So I called them up to find out how to do it, Yes, I will have to. Oh yes, Medical – yes that cost me a lot of money for the 485. Police check, yeah. I mean that was one of the things where I felt a like intimidated. So that’s why I went to a migration agent. So, that’s medical, police checks, passport photos!! Laughs,. Yeah of course, the health insurance. Although personally, I would have the health insurance anyway. So, what else, I had to get an X-ray because I said I was in India so I had to get an X-ray. I think they check if you have TB. 



M:	Tell me about technology. 



Cl:	That is a good question. I like it. Technology. So well, okay lets start from the information on the website of the ministry of migration, Department of migration. So, I find that is one of the most important sources because, you know, its valid for things. I find a lot of websites are out there but their information is not up to date. For me the landing page was always the department website. Personally, I found it actually quite useful for like, you know, this is the documents you need. I mean, at the end of the day that’s all you want to know, okay so.. I found it relatively easy. What I didn’t find easy was to find out what is my visa I should apply for yeah?. So in terms of once I know which visa I need, then it’s easy to look up what I need to apply for the visa. Okay, so If I don’t know, what is my resource? I would say, like, the newsletters. I actually did read a lot of these newsletters from this site [Acacia]. That’s the only thing that I was happy to get, for my 100 bucks that I paid. Laughs. Skype to migration agent. They are in Sydney but that’s just convenient. But, you know what, I actually found this consultant through Facebook.  So, that means that I posted, umm, On Facebook, I said can anyone recommend me someone. Yes, and that was a good recommendation. 



M:	Social connections?



Cl:	Yeah, so very important. Okay, umm, so who is there. So when it comes to all this study visa stuff, I would say my peers. For me it was like a very very important resource. So ones who went through the process, like, a year older in the process, they have a lot of insights. I also had – so my landlord was a migration agent but he always tried to make me pay for it and I paid so much rent that I never wanted to go to him, like, officially. But he would, Like you know, when he had a good day I’d say… I guess when he had a good day, he felt like… I guess Im a good tenant and I tried to make his life easy. Sometimes, he could feel, I guess, sometimes it came to him to understand that I’m trying to make his life easy, not complaining bla, bla, bla, and then in return he would give me a little bit advice. But that’s, I think that was, when it came to the extension of the 1 year. Umm. Well, umm, when I think about the first time I did this working holiday, I pretty much did this on my own, when I think about. That was all like, phone calls to the Department in Germany. I would just call these guys up, and be like okay how do I do this. Yeah, and then so, I posted this question for recommending someone and I think why I took on the recommendation of this person – I studied with someone back in Germany who’s sister is basically here and she recommended this agent. And, yeah, I felt like it’s a trusted source. And when it comes to. So, it would really make a difference because when it was the study visa it was mostly the PhD peers. I would also say that the university was really useless. I’m saying this because they need to change their thinking about their position; They want to make money, but like International students is for Australia. It’s not specifically for this university. So, university students are a source of income, but they try to withdraw from any responsibility regarding like, helping with migration process. So, and I think its not clear that its sometimes about very simple information that they can provide. I should probably put this on here. So, these were the sources that were good. But let’s also think about those that were lacking or not good. So, university’s graduate school. They are, don’t get me wrong, they are helpful in the framework they work in, but they cannot go beyond. They miss a little bit of a cross perspective sometimes. It’s a delicate topic which I understand. I am aware of this. I also understand that, yeah, I understand it’s a delicate topic. But the university needs to make a decision at some point. I mean, you are model for your students and you can’t stand up for them? So, what is it that you’re teaching to you students? You want employees? There’s no successful employees if you don’t stand up for your values. In the process, there’s always this question, is there a better way? So, I mean, in a way, I’m quite often lonely in this process because, I think social interaction is very important and I get a lot of information from that so it also makes me dependant on it, in a way, like… that’s why this consultant, the second one, is really good because she thinks beyong with me and I feel like, less dependant on the social network. Yes, I do pay money, but I also feel like. It’s a balanced thing – its like oh okay I never heard about this pathway. Its also because, people are not necessarily hiding. Its just like, umm, It’s a different thing. You pay for a consultation and a person really takes time compared to… yeah, let me relate to my question – is there a better way? I relate that to why I pay for it. Is there a better way for skilled migration? I feel like for me, personally, when it came to the study visa extension, everything was relatively smooth. Also the 485 was relatively easy because I could prove that I had the PhD. But then now when it comes to the skilled migration, I feel like, I need. So I actually have colleagues. So, we are moving on to colleagues who help me with this. It’s a little bit, like I said, like, suddenly, I know I have skills but how do I put these skills into this visa system – into the set if skills set by the visa. I am very practical about it. Im like, Okay so this is what they want to see me so what from all these skills I have, whether that’s like, in a certain training, or in a certain job – How does that translate into what their idea of what skill is. How do I translate that? Its exhausting and I also find it a bit ridiculous, but I have to overcome that, overcome my ego and just be practical and say, yeah whatever. 



M:	Why PR?



Cl:	Yea this decision. For me the decision was made when I first arrived on my tourist visa. I wanted to live here.



M:	How does the decision to migrate affect Family/community/relationships?



Cl:	Yeah, it’s a bit massive. Because my family is back where I come from. They don’t travel. They say they don’t like flying, and I think why…that’s the exact reason why I between my first arrival and my second arrival as well here, because it was the process of saying okay I have to make a decision for my family or for myself. And I made this decision for myself.



M:	Immigration policies?



Cl:	Yes, I would say maybe, because a skill came on the list. Yeah, that fits my profile quite easily. I believe so. 



M:	Challenges?



Cl:	Yeah so. It is for me the skills assessment. It’s the latest thing in my. The skills assessment process because theres certain features that define this skill, or this profession and I know I have the skill. I actually worked in this profession for many years. I also have experience beyond that – the defined way. But, it comes down to what the university will certify in terms of working hours and wage. So, that has a double catch because we all know we work more than we actually put on paper. So, that’s one catch and the other catch is, you know, laughs, Its not that im not willing to work more, its how much you get. Yeah, so it’s a process. Im currently in this process. Let me come back to why this first consultation was shit because at the time I was thinking… I was a bit one dimensional. I was okay, I came to Australia to do this PhD… I do this study thing and you know, that’s fine. I do have the awareness of how this migration stuff works. For me it was about living here and I didn’t have the awareness this entire like, skilled migration, politics and all that, yeah. I was naïve and arrogant at the same time, like, why wouldn’t you give me a visa, and so this person was giving me advice. Good advice would have been to say, looking at my CV you can apply for PR right now with this set of skills because this job is on the list and everything is about this list. Your whole life centres around this list. That would have been a good advice and so what happened. I was doing my PhD doing this study thing not having the awareness that I actually, sort of, lose. Of course, I don’t lose, but on paper I sort of lose the experience that I had working for several years in a relatively good position and at the university in Germany. Maybe I should have said, how can I get PR. I was just asking for migration advice and this person; just gave dumb advice I already knew. 



M:	Have you provided migration advice?



Cl:	Yes – my PhD peers because I was helped so much and its really little things. How do I apply for police check, what do I do. It’s just these little directions;. Yeah, if there’s, of course I would also say, well what I’m saying is from 2 years ago or 1 year ago. Maybe theres someone who’s more up to date. Yes, I would always help or advise or even when it comes to things like, do you know any migration agent…



M:	Future plans?


Cl:	So feels like, yeah when I look at this maps, it feels like, I could have done this PR already and for some reason I’m doing alllllll this stuff. I feel like I’m doing a big turn. So, at the moment, I’m waiting, So I wanna get my… I identified the visa with the help of one of my peers – it’s the skill actually. that I wanna apply for… and I need to get my skills assessed. For that I contacted Vetassess. So various documents ofcourse – My key document, lets just the key ones, not silly ones where you have to show that you did the PhD and all – that’s fine. But, key document would be – okay so I called up Vetassess. For me the question was do they assess the skills or do they assess that I have this title, and they said it’s the skills. I need to show that I have the skills. They said the title doesn’t matter. So the key document would be, demonstrate skills So on the website which says so like, x, y, z skills to show. So Im very practical in my approach so Im like tick tick, yes I have this, no don’t have this. So when I say, I don’t have this, can I maybe show it? Is there something that I am not thinking about that can be shown. So my place, is about ‘University lecturer’ and they have stuff like, you know, sparks class discussion. Of course I’m doing that. Of course, Im holding seminars, I’m attending workshops. So, my key document is – at the university is called ‘statement on service’. On Friday I sent to my employer everything I did at the university and its various jobs. I did for 1 year I did advising for students at all levels, on various questions. Then of course, tutoring. Then of course, there’s a catch to it. The catch is that – so I did PhD research – but they want to see, and I’m not sure how to show that. So, they’re saying a PhD is not a research position that counts for the skill of university lecturers but to say that you’re a university lecturer you need to show that you are doing research. So how can I bring that? So, I need to see how to do that. I think its quite interesting to say that I have a degree which is called Doctor of Philosophy but that’s not a research, like doesn’t demonstrate research skills. So, that’s what I mean by.. you know, needing to understand their understanding of how they see it. I mean at the moment, one thing was, I was paid to help writing for an award application so I will bring this in. I will bring in that yeah I am writing publications from my own research. I’m peer reviewing in journals. So, I tried to get the documentation that I’m doing that. So, what it is is really to, out of, sort of, its like a puzzle. I need to bring in for them, my, sort of, puzzled life as a university lecturer – bring it together and be like -  this is what I’m doing. I’m also going to bring in my, I really have management position from the president’s office for 3 years in Germany so its not, I’m not a 25 year old PhD student or something, nothing against 25 yo. But like, I have a whole set of skills that goes beyond this lecturing position. 



M:	Migration elsewhere?



Cl:	Yes – I get on a daily basis, I get Canada on my screen. They are trying to get me. I don’t know why but on my Facebook it comes up every day. I would rather consider India because its my research site. I would consider, it would be India or like Singapore for me. 



M:	Future plans?



Cl:	Honestly I’m at a stage where I’m about making money too. I want a more settled life. I had a very vibrant, colourful life. Maybe family – like, creating my own family, like, home and yeah. 



M:	How do you feel?



Cl:	It’s funny I always felt like, it was like a straight-forward process and now I can see like, you know, sometimes you have to do these lucratic things. But now I feel like it was actually quite a mess. I think I wasn’t aware how crucial that was – [referring to Acacia]. It wasn’t just misinformation. This person was actually mis-guiding me a couple of years ago. But I think I wish I had consulted someone who had the awareness to say hey, are you actually aware that you could already apply for PR. Although, I have to say, to be fair I would’ve lost my scholarship as an international student. So I would have to wait for 3 years to not lose my scholarship. I had to remain an international student. I mean I just want to add that I never really considered myself a migrant which might sound a bit silly because I feel like I belong here. When someone asks me like, why Australia? It’s really a very intuitive thing and it really feels like, yeah, in a way, I feel like yeah I’m in the right place in the right time. This is why I am very focused and determined to stay because for me it’s like, no question. I think for me it would be a shock if it doesn’t work out.M:	When did you migrate to Australia?



Ju:	Technically speaking, I haven’t migrated to Australia yet but I come to Australia in 2015, It think its February. 



M:	What were the main factors?



Ju:	We were just trying to look for difference, a different lifestyle. We meaning my husband and I. I think we just got married few months before that and then its just work in China getting so stressful, and also all the family in China trying to push us to have children and we feel like – we want to have a change, to do something different before we actually have a child. Another thing is that they were just trying to push us to buy a house as well and we working in Shanghai but we don’t like the city and we always want to find a different city. You know, its so big. But then the big environment especially the political and economic environment was so demanding. We feel like we didn’t belong. So we thought why don’t we go to Australia and have a look. 



M:	Were there other destinations in mind?



Ju:	Umm.. We – because we only have friends in Australia, in Germany friends. I think at that time we didn’t have any friends in Canada so we are trying to look through our friends ways to see whats going on in different countries. But both of us, we speak English. We thought Australia is maybe the easiest place we could start looking for. Umm.. I speak French too but my husband doesn’t like French so we just go to Australia. 



M:	So did you consider European countries?



Ju:	Actually we thought about Germany as well but we thought Australia will be the first step. We go have a look first. And then now, 4 years we stay here. 



M:	Ethnic background



Ju:	So, my husband and I we are both Ethnic Chinese. We were born and raised in China and we coming from the same province – the middle part of China, but different cities. Our family, ancestry is long history. I come from a big family. My grandparents, they were scholars. They were like educated but my dad, he didn’t, because of the history reasons in China, because of peace generation, he didn’t went for, you know, formal education. My mom is the same. And yeah, I think in general the whole fanily, my grandparents generation – even though I was little but I can tell the difference of their impact on our generation. Not on my father’s generation but our generation. What kind of my brother and I – we look for formal education, we want to learn more. My husband is a different story. His dads side is, his dad is a construction worker or manager in some period and his mom coming from a different family background. His family is like, so complicated, I didn’t like that. Like, his parents was always fighting, like I didn’t know that before we were dating or after we were dating for so long to meet his parents. Yeah, anyway, it’s a long story. Furthermore, to the grandparents generation, I think his dads side were very rich. Moms side was quite poor. Like, exactly like my family background. So, maybe that’s a historical coincidence. How we joined to each other, you know, with that baggage’s, I don’t know. 



M:	Did the family have a history of migration?



Ju:	My family, they migrated from the North part of China to the middle part of China. It also, in consistence with Chinese history as well. There was like 4 generations before that – there was some political movements, and they moved south. You may want to check the Chinese history. And I think once they move dto this mountain area, I think my dads family, they bought all the land. So, they will settle down in there. But my grandparents generation, they were like super rich and I think they were like, travelling around, yeah but my dad didn’t tell us stories about their generation. 



M:	How did you and husband meet?



Ju:	We actually met at high school. Yeah, we went to the same boarding school and then we met there. It was boring and then, you know, both of us – my husband and I were like studying nerds, in Australian terms. But yeah, anyway, we met through students union doing all this kind of crazy students work.



M:	Professional background?



Ju:	I think, its really hard to say. So, I studied English, the language, as my Bachelor degree and then I did some work as a interpreter and translator and then I found a specific area for migration to have foreigners – we call expatriates to China to work, mainly to work. So then, I worked in that area called relocation and migration services, I think for roughly 5 years, before I came to Australia. And now I am doing PhD studies in Migration studies. We can say its consistent, I am still using my professional knowledge about how expatriates migrate and how they adopt to workplace and manage the work-life balance, things like that. All the ideas are coming from that professional background. I think if you look at it that way, I think, I am still using my professional knowledge to this. But at some point, I think this move beyond that as well because at that time it mainly focused at the law, the legal background, the legal regulations in China but now I am moving to another direction – to research the experience. So, in that sense, it’s not so much related to my professional training or professional experience, I think. So I come here in 2015. I think I still worked for the China company for about a year or so We just doing remote – like – working from home from over here. And then, at that time I was pregnant and then I had a leave, a break, a very short break and then I started uni over here and I did my Masters over here and then just go further. I didn’t go for workplace job or something. At that time, I just thought, if I want to change my lifestyle, I may start it from way of thinking. Probably that was wrong. I should just go find a job or do something else and be happy. Laughs. 



M:	How long did you plan/consider the move?



Ju:	I thnk the idea was probably in our mind roughly for 2 years. It was quite difficult for my husband to make the decision. He was, still is, the only child in his family and he never really got this idea to live so far away from his family. I was the opposite. I was, I travelled a lot within China and I always wanted to find out whats new and have new experiences. So, I kind of persuade him to try different things. So coming to Australia, like, actually, like, when it came to my mind, I said to him that if you don’t want to go, I will go by myself. So, you know, he said, like we are a couple, so we are supposed to be together. So, he said okay – lets do this. So then, after we had a serious talk, I started to do IELTS and then he did IELTS as well. But its just, everything on paperwork, seems to be so good for me. Not until we come we realised that I couldn’t carry on the same profession because of the different regulations of being a migration agent over here. So, that was quite challenging for me actually. But he, he was, he had a small company back in China and he has all this business background and our friends over here offered him a job right away so bingo – and we stayed. We come as business visa and then he was offered a job, and then we start to talk to migration agent, and then, and looking to what kind of visa we can do. But, that’s where the difficulty started. Apparently, its Marketing something – at that time, they need to do a skills assessment something, and he couldn’t pass that and then we thought about other options. So that company hire me as well but because of my professional background, they couldn’t hire me for the regulations even though I have all the knowledge of marketing, sales… I have the experience but it’s just the industry doesn’t fit. I worked for the consultancy company before so I have all this kind of skills. The migration consultancy – and I have management skills because I literally built a team from only myself to 6 people by the time I left the company only in 3 years. I have marketing skills, I basically marketing our migration service, and relocation service, like a lot. And I know, I have sales experience as well, prior to this migration consultancy, I did sales for pad company and steel company as well. I was quite successful in each job. It’s just when we come here, they say no – you cannot just say you have that, and it doesn’t count. I have a degree in English language and then they were saying you have a degree in English Language, and you did marketing and sales and the you did migration consultancy – that’s all migration and that’s a specific industry which doesn’t fit over here. So, we talked so many different options. Its just – nothing works. So, I said, well, okay maybe this is a time to do my Masters because I always wanted to do a Masters. It sounds like the only right move, and also because I was pregnant and yeah.. and now we start to look for student visa and we realised if my husband needs a full-time job, I need to do a Research degree. So, here I am. 



M:	Research on visa options



Ju:	Oh, we didn’t conduct any research or anything on that. Actually its just, we said, to over friends here we want to come to Australia and have a look. Do you want to.. Can you like, invite us? So they sent us an invitation letter saying you know, because we did business before, and we invited them to come over to have a look. Yeah, so we used that letter to apply. So, they gave us a Business visa, I think we didn’t, at that time we didn’t have to choose which type of visa we need to apply. 



M:	Role of family in migration



Ju:	My parents, they actually, they don’t mind. But they had no capacity to help us but they just simply believe that everything I do is right. My brother never concerned anything about my life or work. So, my family, I don’t think they helped or resist I any way. My husband’s family was actually like a push force for us to come because his mom simply like push us to buy a house, have children. I think that’s a last draw on my husbands shoulder to push us to move further , to move far away. For me, I think, I just wanted to maybe change, I just wanted to move away to another city just within China, eventually. And then, yeah, but his mom and dad divorced by that time and that was hard time, like, his mom was super depressed, and she lived with us and she had a really negative effect on me. I think my husband saw that even though I have a really good relationship with my mother in law but she affect me like, mentally, psychologically. And I wasn’t happy. Like, I worked super hard. So my husband barely saw me at home. So I always go early to work and come back like, 9 or 10 at night so yeah, but I don’t know. Maybe that’s a good thing or not. And then, another thing was that she found a partner before we moved. I think she moved to living with him few months before we actually decided we wanted to come because my husband, you know, somebody is looking after her and she seems to be happy. Yeah, so it seems like, her life actually, was big part of my husbands consideration, whether, you know, to move away or not to move away even though at the beginning, like I said earlier, we have 2 years in considering to move but he never actually make up his mind to go but that’s the thing. She moved away and she moved away with her life - find a partner, get a job and they were happy so that means that we can actually have our life. But we didn’t like Shanghai. We thought that we would go to other cities anyway but why not to be brave and go to different country. 



M:	Friends and Community



Ju:	I think in terms of friends, I think I only saw them moving away like one moved to France, one moved to Germany. But they were in different situations – they married a local. But seeing the life, like you know on social media they put on different .. (inaudible) But they were not providing any like, detail process as to how to go out of China. Because my professional background, I was quite confident, I will be able to find a way. Anyway, other, like close friends, they don’t want us to go actually. They feel like, you know youre a good friend. We want our friend to stay together but at that time I thought we are just coming to Australia maybe for a year, we will probably go back. Anyway, we didn’t. And other friends I don’t think we have a lot of friends for networking, or Im not a big fan of social media and FB was banned in China. And, yeah, they are, not so many platforms were available to us to get information. We have education agents in China but they always charge you money to give information which I don’t believe as well and yeah, for us we just thought we have to come to Australia to have a look and search the information by ourselves and also because we speak the language we are so confident we are going to survive here by all means.We have couple of business clients – so before we come here, my husband was doing business with them. Maybe like, I think, to a couple of close clients he mentioned he may be coming to Australia. I think they were quite supportive but they didn’t ask then why.



M:	How long did the initial visa process take?



Ju:	The first – the business visa, I think that was quite straight forward. So the friend over here send us the invitation and then we just book the flights; we just showed them our bank account with enough savings to stay in Australia for a year. Yeah, that’s it. It was 1 year visa. It only took us like 4 days. So, I prepare the documents. I think that was maybe spend one day filling the forms and preparing other documentation. That was quite quick. But before we do that, actually I was always thought I may go for further education so I did other process like notarising our degrees, translate that, get them officially transcribed, translate into English and notarise that. We did our ielts test. – that was not required but I prepared that anyway as a just, you know, just, out of my professional experience, you know, that we may need other options and they may request this kind of documentation and if we come to Australia nobody in China has the capacity to help us to do that kind of thing. We even notarise our marriage certificate, our birth certificates. You know everything I can think of as a professional migration consultant, I prepared it. The only thing I didn’t no is the criminal record because that is a timely document. Even if I did that I know that at some point I will do that again. So, that’s the only document that I knew could be handy but I didn’t do. 



M:	How do you consider to be skilled?



Ju:	Like I mentioned to you before I have the knowledge of the management, sales, marketing. I have the two different language capacity, no I have to say 3 – Chinese, French, English – that’s 3. And then I have cross-cultural background like dealing with expatriates and migration experience as well. Even though maybe that doesn’t apply over here but I, it can work for companies who is dealing with Chinese, you know. Im a expert in that kind of background. I just feel like Im skilled. I’m actually really skilled. I have 7 years working experience, 5 years of management skills and I couldn’t transport them over here. Its just a shame. I didn’t actually go out and find a job because of I was pregnant, and I thought you know, if I don’t have a long-term visa maybe it’s kind of challenging for me to find a job. So, which I couldn’t say I was biased or, its just we thought about our visa and then I didn’t even go and apply. 





M:	Tell me about all the visa cat you went through. 



Ju:	Okay so visas right. We have business visa, and then we went to I think bridging visa and then we have student visa and then my daughter was born and then we have bridging visa again because we have to re-apply all 3 together and then we have student visa again and that was a change for student visa (574 to 500). Again we have a bridging visa because we got a new student visa. So here, I think it took us 4 days. This is 2015. And this still 2015. Bridging visa i don’t remember how long... I don’t remember exactly how long. This was granted over here for 3 years – and then this bridging visa because my daughter was born. That was a mistake because when we applied for this student visa we forgot to mention that I was pregnant or something and then and they were saying, after my daughter was born, that you have to apply for another visa, because they were saying you didn’t mention over here that you are expecting a baby. If you know, at that point, you won’t have to go through this process. And we yeah, so these take couple of months I think. So these were granted July, yeah and for 2.5 years until the end of the study and then this was – this was when. I think in May 2018 and then – that was pretty soon. 4 years, I think 4 years visa. That only take I think 2 weeks in between from that bridge visa to student visa. I think that was the quickest one. Over here, this was submit I think in March and was granted in July because they had to review the information for my daughter, I think I had to submit birth certificate, immunisation – I don’t know why they ask for that. I think they ask for a few documentations. I just feel like you know, that’s my daughter but they wanna ask to prove that’s our daughter. Laughs.  



M:	Was husband a dependent?



Ju:	Yeah – so here my husband is the same. No business we are the same, we are not dependents on either of us but then starting from here – he’s the dependant. But then because I’m doing the research, he is able to work full time without any working hour restrictions. 



M:	Commercial services



Ju:	We use migration agent over here – Chinese ethnicity background. I did this myself. I did this myself. I should put the sponsor nomination somewhere here. Okay so in between over here, I think last year.. what time last year?.. August last year 2018 I should put in here – employer nomination. That’s, over here in between. We ask our husbands employer to do this. This is my husband’s side - to do the employer nomination for us because at that time he actually had 2 years working experience in Australia. We thought, you know, maybe we can give it try. And then, that’s not right, this visa go rejected. Not visa, this process go rejected. It didn’t even reach to the visa application stage yet. So rejected in, um, whats now, April? It was rejected in April. So, we used, really, we shouldn’t do that.. we used migration agent to do that. Its really bad idea. I should do. I should wait and trying to do it myself.



M:	Why?



Ju:	This agent is a good salesman. He present all this opportunity for us to take it. He didn’t have enough legal knowledge of preparing the documents. I don’t know how he deal with other clients but from my perspective I think this guy is just taking money for submitting application and the money for the training place as well. So that’s why I was so pissed off when the nomination go rejected. And from the immigration rejected letter – I can tell they didn’t do the job because. I can do that documentation in one day. If I can do it in one day then that means that he probably just did that in one day and he didn’t even thought of thoroughly what should be done.



M:	Other commercial services



Ju:	So you remember I said that we had all the documents in China translated and notarised so that come in handy over here. So they didn’t do anything. So, I did all the job for this guy. He just charged for the money. And, we did IELTS. I think my husband did a second one over here because that expired. So yeah, he did ielts. Yeah my husband did that. No he didn’t even do skills assessment. 



M:	Why did you use a migration agent?



Ju:	Its just that because I don’t have time to do it myself. I was studying, I raise a child and I worked as well. I just don’t have the mental capacity to do the application. Its just because this migration process requires details – like, all the planning, all the document preparations, right. I thought if we hire somebody and they do all this kind of planning job for us.. you know.. that would be easy. But, that’s the thing of trusting other people and trusting them professionally. Actually, they are not professional. That’s quite disappointing. I don’t know. I was quite mad. 



M:	How much have these processes cost – money wise?



Ju:	Oh – that’s a lot of money. I don’t remember how much but okay – just have a general idea right. We did IELTS twice for me. My husband did twice as well. We did medical check I think, twice. So students visa – business visa we paid application. So for 2 of us, I think it cost us 2500 rnb so thats $500AUD. And IELTS – in China it was more expensive – I think 400 something in China –  $350. Medical check, so twice for me and then plus Joy. For family its more expensive. I think it cost us for 2 of us – mine was 600 something – we used BUPA, it was quite expensive 600 + 2 + 3 and this is the most expensive one – employer. So student visa we paid $500, employer nomination we paid $2000 and our employer paid $6000 for the training fees, and then student visa – so these two I think is nearly 600. And then here its 600 as well. The good thing for research student is that husband and dependent – they are free so that’s $600 as well. Oh insurance money – that’s the biggest amount and tuition fees. So insurance for the first one for 3 years, I think we paid $15k as a family. Its insane. But now we are paying more. So, for PhD we paid 20000 – insane right.And then tuition fee – Masters - $25000 and then second year its half – I was lucky. Luckily for PhD the tuition fee was waived and we got the scholarship and cover for 1 persons insurance. Childcare – so Joy attending childcare since she was 10 months old. So, now shes 3.5. I think the first year I think its only 10-12 so that’s 1 year old. I think 2000 something. 2nd and 3rd and (roughly per year) – for childcare the same amount as my tuition fee. Its that much. So, every penny we earned, its back in Australia. So we checked our bank account actually. If we look exactly now back to 4 years ago, we have the same saving. So 4 years passed, we spent all the money we earn here and the savings were all gone in between. This savings which is saved gradually, a little bit by the time. That’s insane right!? So - If I am not a skilled migrant, I don’t know who is qualified as a skilled migrant! Laughs



M:	Technology



Ju:	I think technology – only like phone or no – I mean like networking. Actually, That’s one thing we feel like we didn’t do a lot of research on the things we should do. Like, especially choosing a agent – we didn’t do like, a thorough assessment, whether this guy are, you know, experienced or qualified. I only look at his registration number to look at whether he is a legal registered agent. That’s the only think I looked at. That was a huge mistake. So, looking back I think I should use those kind of networks more wisely. Actually, I think there bare some Chinese migration forums online – I don’t remember what they are called. I think tick tak world visa. I used this type of websites to check some requirements when I was free before I come here. But I think very limited. That’s a mistake. I should use that more wisely, definitely and do my research.Currently I didn’t do any research at all. I just go, you know, I finish my study and then I would do everything by myself thoroughly and prepare that. I know its that – maybe it’s a mistake as well. Maybe we should think about migration from now as a starting point because it takes time and its constantly changing. I don’t know. Its just that I don’t have time for that. Its more concerning of psychological, emotional management than time consuming actually. I think if I squeeze the time to do research, maybe I can do that. Its just, keeping up with all of these changes is so – like – driving me crazy. If I start to do this process and then they just suddenly change, so like, whats the point. I do all this preparation and its for nothing.



M:	Social connections



Ju:	I think I have to say the networking in China give us some positive perspective about migration to Australia because if you look at the life in China – I mean apparently it looks beautiful. But the trip we went back to China last Christmas was quite depressing as well actually. So we see all this economic bubble in China. We can see whats wrong in there but our friends, our family sitting there – they couldnt see it. That was kind of our motivation to stay here. I just feel like they were driving by – not social media – by the media, by politics, by everything in this huge bubble but they were so much in it, they couldn’t see that. And we were there from here coming over there, you know, after 4 years, we can actually see that, there’s a huge bubble – for housing, for property, for education and all the anxiety and depression they are feeling daily. They didn’t express but they , like you can feel it, when you are with them. Everybody is in, so quick pace, they were rushing to work, rushing to school, rushing to finish everything, rushing to..I don’t know, theyre just rushing. They never even stop and think why we are doing this. Whats the point of docing this. So you know if a child is going to primary school, why are you putting them into early training starting from 8 months old. Howcome? They should enjoy being a baby.. being able to cry.. play..



M:	Regulatory aspects?



Ju:	We have so many right. Over here for business, we have to have the invitation; we have to got money, and then that’s it. So student visa. Obviously I have to have the educational background for the schools, so yeah, IELTS, and financial. What else – medical, marriage cert notarised, yeah and then Student visa is the same thing + my daughters birth cert. Over here employer nomination because the agent didn’t do ant good job we just take whatever we had, student visa is the same thing it’s the same one. But how come you have to do IELTS – IELTS is a skill. IT doesn’t expire right. Can you like, when you write your thesis – can you say please – I don’t swear but that’s insane to say that your English language skills expired – come on. Who come up with that idea! OMG. 



M:	Current immigration policies?



Ju:	It change so fats – I lost tracking of them. I remember when I first come there was the skilled occupation list so that changed from every year. At the beginning I was checking on that I thought that I may go for one of the occupation on the list and then it changed next year I thought, whats the point. I wont go for that. I’ll go for something I like. If Australia for some reason, they don’t accept me, I will go somewhere they will accept me for who I am for the profession I like. Maybe its too ideal. 



M:	Obstacles/Challenges



Ju:	Challenges all the time right – money – like you can see all the money I have spent. I think financially, that’s a huge challenge. Money – Money – all this money. Its too much money. I wont highlight all of them but Money. Money is the main challenge – money. And then regulation as well. Like regulation, this one, employer sponsorship. I don’t know whether it’s a challenging of visa process or its a challenging of finding like a really good migration agent or the Government should regulate the migration agent. I don’t know how to put this way but there should be like 3 points, So regulation on just visa itself and regulation on agents and also there should be assessment of agents. 



M:	Social support services?



Ju:	NGOS they are not a big thing in China and they are corrupted. They lost public trust so we never use any NGOS. I think I should mention, like, peer support over here. Peer professional knowledge save us some money. 



M:	Okay – next steps?



Ju:	Future is beautiful, right? Option 1 – finish PhD, go back to China and be an Associate professor and not recognised by anybody internationally. Number 2 – stay in Australia, find a, find a, I don’t know post doc or lecturing of im lucky enough, or researcher. I think we have post work visa or something and then depending on where I am going, probably get PR in few years. So, I’m thinking so this kind of job, I can go or you know, professional jobs. It’s the last option of staying in Australia for doing something. I really love doing research so if professional kind of job can allow me to do research as well, I don’t mind, as long as what I’m doing I like. That’s the whole point of the whole process. OR We go to another country – so go for Postdocs or I don’t know, if any other opportunities for NGOS or academic jobs. Maybe Canada. Its sounds like, super cool to go there but it’s a bit cold for us. It’s just a thought. 



M:	Family 



Ju:	I probably sponsor my niece. I have two niece but if their parents want them to come here. My first niece she is 10 yo so she wants to come, and maybe you know sponsor her to study over here – that’s a good option. My parents wont be able to enjoy the lifestyle over here because of the language. They don’t speak English. I feel like its going to be super difficult for them to fit in. My in-laws, I don’t think they will be enjoying over here as well. So, probably they will come and stay for short term – sponsor them for short term but I don’t think for PR they will. 



M:	Have they visited?



Ju:	No – their visa got rejected for no reason.  Okay so we were in the bridging visa, so parents visa got rejected. So apparently, we were on bridging visa so they thought our parents will come here, stay here, don’t want to return. That’s what they thought, They gave us reason that said that my husband was the only child and then I applied my parents visa first and they rejected that and said they found my parents relationship within China was not strong enough to draw them back to China. And I was like, that’s insane and there was no appealing process. And then I applied for my husband, they rejected for same reasons, said that my husband was the only child so they were so afraid that they will come over and stay over here and not go back to China. Come on, My MIL has a mother – an elder mother, and all this network in China. I barely think that they will stay over here and got go back. I got a friend coming to visit me – so July last year I got family here – my cousins. So, they come visit us so I just give them the website. They submit application by themselves. 



Ju:	[looks at the map] So much money we have spent!



M:	How do you feel with the map?



Ju:	I didn’t realise we have spent so much money. Im gonna take this back and talk to my husband – this is how much money we have spent. And this is probably only part of that right? You see we did all this documentation in China, that’s separate. That’s OMG. Umm. I mean if I look back I feel like if you just think about migration, I should do a better job from the beginning – not just running about doing all this kind of things, pursuing my career which is not a career yet and I don’t know whether its going to be a career. Its just something I’m interested in and looking back from the perspective of migration starring for 2015 use my professional knowledge and think thoroughly even before we are going so far away – do that at the beginning, planning, and yeah… I wont be able to sleep tonight realising how much money ive spent on this only in 4 years. So much money on migration. We wont be buying ahouse in like 10 years or something. Do you want to have a place where you feel like you can mess with walls, you can draw on the walls. Actually, I really want to draw on the walls. You know this kind of place, you can like destroy it. You don’t want to think about what you are doing, you know, and also I want to find this place where I can buy all this kinds of cups and mugs that I like.M:	Alright, cool. So when did you first migrate to Australia?



R:	Yeah, five months ago



M:	and what are the motivations behind your move?



R:	Well, to be honest it was just my PhD. I was considering Canada and I had applied to a few programs there but they were not successful. So, the only option I had at the time was Australia. I didn’t want to lose this. So I decided to come here. 



M:	So in terms of like choosing Australia, like you told me that you were considering other options, so how long did you consider these multiple options and plan your migration anyway?



R:	Yes, I wanted to do my masters and my Phd because I feel that I needed that exposure. So I mean, if I’ll be doing a PhD from Pakistan I don’t think so that I would learn something or gain something. So, therefore I wanted to go have a changed environment and to learn from a different education system. I got a chance to go to Italy to do a small summer school for 3 months. So that was my only time away from home. 



M:	Parents 



R:	I mean they migrated from Amritsar – that’s a part of India. 



M:	Professional background?



R:	Back home in Pakistan I was working as a lecturer and a researcher at a university. And I was teaching Sociology to master’s students. 



M:	Choosing Australia



R:	It was like almost like a year. It took one year to first gather my documents, to write a good statement, write a good proposal and then I submitted them to universities in North America because that was my plan. I never thought about Australia. I applied in a number of universities in North America but that didn’t work out and I was quite upset. And then one of my colleagues, he was also looking for options, he said why don’t you think about Australia, ancd universities in UK. And I was like, No I don’t wanna go there, and he said like well whats wrong with it. You can apply and then think about whether you wanna go or not. So then I applied in Monash and that was quite an easy process and after 4 months, I got the scholarship and.. I was like oh, that was like, I wasn’t prepared for it… I wasn’t ready because after getting so many rejections, I was like not expecting that I will get it. But anyways, so then I thought about it for 3 days to decide whether I will take it because I never wanted to go to Australia. I don’t know why. Just because I thought maybe geographically it is too far and Canada – I have other expectations or an image about the education system there compared to Australia. Anyway, I decided, because I didn’t have any other opportunities and I had to do my PhD. Then I started applying for visa and.. it was quite easy for me because I was fully funded and I didn’t need much like bank statements, I already had IELTS – that was part of my journey for applying for different universities. You need to have that. So, I had that and then yeah, I straight away applied for my visa. 



M:	How did you learn about these options?


R:	I was working with researchers so one of the things I used to do in my office hours is research for scholarship and explore on Google because… searching for my need.. I had very high expectations that I’ll able to go and be able to do things. I had a friend who was also looking for similar opportunities and he used to tell me why don’t you apply for this, you know, this university has an opportunity and so on. And before that, I mean, I went to England and that was the time when I learnt this thing. I started writing my ideas because I already had some ideas of what I wanted to do, my research, and I showed it to a professor in Bristol and she said yes and I got very excited. She said that you have a great idea and it was very much aligned with her research that was recently published. So, and then she said like, you need to do this.. and.. that. And within a few minutes she refined my proposal, and transformed my idea into a working proposal and she was like yes you can apply here but I am not sure about funding. That was the point when I got excited about this PhD thing and I got some connections as well and I started writing more seriously, and I started applying. So some of the things I found by myself and some my friends and colleagues helped me in looking for. 



M:	Family



R:	My family was very happy about that. My family is like very, I wouldn’t say conservative, they are liberal about my study, and you can go out and have fun but now its your time to get married. So they were quite against my job as well because before me there was no precedent. So they were like shes wasting time. We don’t know why she is doing this job and there are these proposals there. But anyway, I didn’t pay attention to that and I kept looking around for opportunities and I never got any emotional or financial support from my family. So now, when I got it, that was the time when they got excited and said oh she was actually doing something for the past 3 years because before that they did not know what I was doing… whenever I would go to office from 9 to 6, they would say like, what is this! They were like, accepting of this thing that I am moving, I am going and then they started taking pride in me, and told other family members as well that look, she’s doing well. Well, let me just add here that the family that I am talking about is my grandparents and my uncles – my maternal uncle because my parents are – my mother died when I was 13 and my father, I mean, I don’t live with him, we just couldn’t get along well with him so we just moved, I and my sister, we moved to our grandparents house. So I am talking about that family. So, yeah, I mean, then after a lot of struggle, doing everything on my own and trying to find ways and guidance within my group – friends and my family, I think I made it. Now they are quite happy about it that she has done something with her life and we are very proud of her. Otherwise when I was into my job they were just thinking its not something worthy but now they tell this to everyone that oh Ryma is doing really well, shes in Australia or shes doing her PhD and yeah. In terms of support, they didn’t really give any support to me but now they are happy where I ended up and of course then I got married, so they are even more happy.  



M:	Husband? His role?



R:	He is… Actually, the person that I was talking about who helped me in finding these opportunities and convincing me that I can do this, who was my friend that time but now hes my husband. He was very supportive and I think that its his support that I had earlier as well until now due to which I have come this far otherwise I would’ve surrendered. He really supported and even his family. They are all very educated and they didn’t mind that you know, daughter in law is doing something else and going abroad alone, so they didn’t have any issues. One of the person who means a lot to me in this entire process of about 4 to 5 years of my life, the credit goes to my husband. 



M:	Family friends or community in Australia?



R:	I had… when I decided to move here I had my uncles wife.. her brother in law.. He has his family in Sydney. But, I am not very comfortable with them so but I mean, they connected me with some other people or if I need to ask something or if I ever come to Sydney I can stay with them, with their family and he gave me contacts of his friends who are living in Melbourne and if I need something I can just call them. And one of them is an immigration lawyer as well so he was like oh if you need something, anything, any information, if you plan to stay here, apply for immigration, you can come to me. So that was one. And then when I was deciding to select my accommodation I was quite upset. I was like oh I don’t know where to live and I don’t know what Melbourne is, and because in Melbourne I don’t have any family or friends. Then my husband, he called me. He mentioned that his niece lives here in Melbourne and maybe I can stay with her 1 or 2 weeks while I find my own accommodation. Then he spoke to his niece and she contacted me that okay we can pick you up from the airport and you can come and stay with us as long as you want and in the mean while you can find your own accommodation. So I was like, okay great. So that’s how I developed a few contacts in Melbourne and it was very nice of them because when I arrived here at midnight she came to pick me up with her small kid who was sleepy, and, she still came to pick me up. And due to her I had access to the Pakistani community as well. So she made my early time in Melbourne very nice. Otherwise if I had to stay somewhere else on my own then probably it wouldn’t have been the same. 



M:	Visa options?



R:	No, I hadn’t. When I applied for the visa the only thing that I had in my mind was the PhD. So I didn’t look at any other options. 



M:	Skilled migrant?



R:	I think I am skilled, but my skills are in teaching and research, and teaching and research is a skill. It is not something that you’re born with, you learn it. So, yeah, I think I am skilled. I have done my Masters; I have this qualification and now I am doing my Postgraduate studies so it means that I am skilled. What else do I need to have to be skilled! I started applying to universities in 2017. 2017 October I applied and in March I got rejection from all of them and then I applied only in Monash. Before that I applied in Canada only. Then in August I applied in Australia, in one university and October I applied to a university in UK and by that time I got a reply from Australia. So, it took me like almost a year to find an opportunity. That was also hard, like applying and then requesting feedback, like what was wrong with my application, for admissions, especially for North America. They don’t want your proposal for the research... they just want your motivation because they have first 3 years of coursework and then 3 years of research so they want you to come here and learn these courses and then develop a project rather than coming with a proposal. So, I had to write like, many, letters. I still remember on my computer I had like xyz for every university that I applied for like, this university is looking for this, the other is looking for that and I almost spent like a $2000 on just application because there are application fees like $100, oo 90 pounds, or $110. I almost, almost lost $2000 on these applications. Here in Monash there is no fee but for North American and UK universities, I had to pay that. I was like Oh My God, I cant do this anymore.



M:	Alright, let's continue that's fine. So yeah, you didn't you didn't look for so the only other thing that you were looking was for other students who started at this time and what was the reason for that?



R:	Yeah maybe to just make connections, make friends before coming here. So I would know that these are also on the same boat. I did connect with Master students through a students group and yeah, I mean, I came here now some of the people were very good friends of mine, they are not of PhD but from masters. So yeah. But I was like I, I became friends with them here not through the social media. 





M:	So also on your map, tell me about the point out any social connections, role of your social connections. So for example, from initial research stages to current migration status. So what are some of the significant things that your social connections might have done that you Want to put on your mouth? So in my case, for example, it was the Facebook group where I found friends and they came to pick me up. So like anything like that that was significant for you in terms of how social





R:	Obviously I mean, that family like Pakistani family who picked me from the airport, and I stayed with them, and they were really nice to me. And yeah, so family friends. Yeah, for accommodation. So, I mean, that was a very significant thing in my early migratory period. So yeah, I mean, I think that is really important because it influenced my initial days. I didn't have to struggle for food or other basic things because everything was there. So, because of them I didn't even feel homesick.



M:	Oh, that's very good. Yeah. If you cannot feel homesick, I think that's excellent. Okay. And tell me about the regulatory aspects of your migration. So were there any government requirements that you had to fulfill example police checks, characters, character tests, points, tests, any health requirements? I mean, you talked about health, but otherwise immigration forms 



R:	Thanks for giving me the example. I also applied for police checks. Yeah, that was a mandatory thing that I had to provide police certificate for this visa. Yeah. This was very cheap - may be $50 or something. 



M:	Thoughts on current immigration policies. And think of it in a policy aspect as well and think of, I suppose, in a way that you can maybe depict on your map if you want to, again, if it is applicable to you. What are the How much do you know about Australia's immigration policies? Have they changed over time since you arrived and how did they affect your migration?



R:	I don't know much about the Australian immigration policy, but I heard from my friends and other fellows, that they are considering engineers and IT people skilled and not the ones who belong to social sciences as a skilled person. So but I because I never thought about applying for immigration here. So therefore, I never try to find out what's going on in Australia’s immigration. So I don't know much about it.



M:	Would you be interested in applying for immigration even in the future know, now that you live do not?



R:	I don't think so. I mean, I haven't decided yet. So maybe in near future, I might end up here as I did earlier. Because I'm applying for Canada. So yeah, and their immigration thing is quite easier and quick as compared to Australia. That's what I know. But I haven't did what Australia immigration policy is and how long it will take, am I eligible or not? I don't know about it, and I didn't explore it. I’ll use the other colour for Canada. I'm applying to Canadian express entry thing, and recently I got invitation to apply and now I'm just gathering my documents. Yeah, and then I'll just send them away. And then let's see what happens. But before getting this ITA, it was a very, very rigorous and stressful process. IELTS - Oh, my God I had to take is because they demand general IELTS, not academic one. So I mean, I couldn't clear it in the first attempt, the second time. I had to do it the second time. Then thankfully I cleared it but I had to pay seven 750 something 750 dollars for it.



M:	And where did you sit? This is test here



R:	here in Melbourne.



M:	And why Canada like what what were the motivations behind moving to Canada?



R:	Last year when I was in Pakistan, one of my friend, a very good friend of mine, she came to my office and she said, Oh, I've got PR of Canada and I was like Wow. Because I think I am the kind of person or maybe because of my experiences with family with some with the Pakistani society in general, I always knew that I cannot live in Pakistan. Maybe because of because I think I'm misfit for that society. And also after visiting some countries abroad, I was like, you know, you know, when they say the Pakistani families used to say, Dimagh kharab ho gaya hai iska [she has gone crazy]. So yeah, my dimagh [mind] was actually I mean, I was like, so keenly into this right, I just want to move either to England or any secular society, free society to experience freedom. So yeah, I knew that I I'll have to apply for immigration at some point of my life. But I but I didn't know where, how, when. So when my friend told me that she got PR for Canada. I was like, I got very excited and I asked her to share with me all the details. How can I get into this? Then she shared her experience and she told me it's very easy, it will take six months and it's the cost is very minimum. Otherwise I always thought maybe immigration requires that you have to spend a lot of money and you need to have certain funds to show and I of course I didn't have it. And I knew my family's not going to help me with that as well. So I was like Wow, that's that's quite reasonable because she she she told me that I mean, the application fees is like 50,000 rupees would be $500 Yeah. So I was like yeah, I can manage that. I mean, it's not difficult and then but then she said, I mean, first you need to get your IELTS and then another important thing was that education equivalency report. Education equivalency. It requires So do you have to submit your degrees your transcripts to a Canadian assessment authority? Yeah, something like that. That’s called world education system so they assess your degree and and make a report if equivalency if your masters it is equivalent to Canada's masters or not, and they just generate that report and for immigration we need that report. So yeah, I applied for that. I mean, right this is the process. This is the time when she was telling me that this is this, these are the steps that you have to take to apply for immigration, that was in 2018. But I applied actually recently, like three months ago. So I spent, I think $300 on this process as well. That's called Wes education, equivalency system system. And it did cost me $300. But it was like, I mean, I was like, okay, that's fine. I can do this. And then she said, when you do these things first because you need good score in IELTS, otherwise your points will be very low. So I was like, Okay, I'll do it later. But I was excited, that okay. I mean, within my given means, I can apply for Canadian immigration. But at the same time, I was into that, applying for PhD things as well. So my entire focus was on PhD, not on immigration. But once I got in and I came here, then I started thinking about immigration as well. And within my second, I think, yeah, in March, I came here in February. And in March, I gave my first IELTS exam because I mean, I knew that I'm, I am going to apply for immigration. And because my I got married in January before coming here, and my in laws are in Canada, so for my husband, it's like, yeah, we will have to go to Canada as well. So I mean, let's see if we can stay there or not. But let's apply for immigration, because his family's there too. So yeah, he also motivated me that yes, we can apply. So I am basically the primary applicant and we both applied together. So yeah, so so far, I spend on IELTS, then on my degrees, recently, oh my god, that was horrible - I had to spend $680 for my medical check. That’s too much. And he was like, What the fuck, and in Pakistan that's a cheap, it's like only 200 or 250. dollars. And here it was like 680. And I was like, oh my god. 



M:	And how is the process going so far? Like, what else do you have to do now?



R:	Yeah, and during this process, I was also worried about the funds that they demand as a statement that you need to have if you're coming as a couple that you must have almost $18,000 CAD so I was like, Oh, I don't have this much money. And my husband also, I mean, even if we put it together if, I mean together, our funds were not enough. So I was so upset. I was literally so stressed…entire week, I couldn't focus on my proposal and stuff and I was like, What am I going to do? I don't know. But then I again, kept on talking to my friend who got her PR last year. She was like, well, you borrow from your friends from your family because I also did the same. I was just like, I mean, who's gonna give me this much money? I mean, are you serious? She said, I mean, talk to your family. Maybe they'll give you or something. But then, I mean, of course, I didn't talk to my family. So yeah, what I did was because I've also developed some friends here, I have developed some connections… that was through that accommodation finding thing. So I have a friend whom I met in Italy, he connected me with her friend who was doing PhD in Melbourne Uni. So she contacted me and she said, I'm leaving this place. If you want to have this and you can, you can. So, then she also shared some other accommodation options to me. And then I end up meeting an Indian woman who is from Brisbane and her brothers houses here near to the uni’s side. I went to her she was very nice to me and I sort of like connected you know, I felt like oh, I mean, okay, there are people who are very caring, who were very loving. So that was the only time I met her and then we were connected through Facebook and that's it. And then I met her last week as well. And I shared that I'm applying to Canada and I don't know what to do. I mean, I don't have money. I was considering to apply for a loan here. Or I was I didn't know why I never used a credit card. So I was like if I can apply for credit card because she also works for the bank. So she explained everything to me that I may not be eligible for credit card because credit card is only for purchases. If you want to have the other credit card to give you cash, then you need to be either permanent resident or some something else. I was like, Oh, damn, but she offered me that I can give you some money if you just needed to keep it in your bank account. I was like, Oh my god, you saved us… I was like, I mean, I'm so relieved. But still, I mean, even if even after adding her money, I was still, I didn't have enough. So I mean, that day, my another friend who who is doing masters here and she came to my office randomly because we had planned for dinner. So she was she asked me what happened. You look so stressed. I said, I'm and this is the issue I'm having. Without any, you know, expectation…I just shared that this is… this is what's going on in my life. She said, I have money I can give you. Why didn't you ask me? I said, I mean, I never thought about it. I was like, I mean, why why anyone would give me money? I mean, you need I mean, of course, I mean, first you have to have that trust thing, then of course you will transfer money in someone's account. So, she said, No, you can have it because I have this much amount and I'll just pay my fees. I mean, and even then I have sufficient amount. So, if you need it for three, four months, you can have it. So, I was like, Oh my god, I never asked people. I have this kind of thing that I don't ask people that I need help. So yeah, then she helped me. And then, now, my funds are sufficient enough. Yeah. But that entire week was very stressful that I didn't know what I'm going to do. 



M:	Do you need to have this bank statement for a certain amount of they need to see that this money has been sitting in your account sometime? And how long does this need money need to be sitting in there? 



R:	Oh, well, my friend who's got her PR she said I mean, I mean the day you apply for you submit your documents and everything. If you just take out the money out straight away, that's fine. But once they start the process, they might ask you to submit a fresh statement because they need just a statement a piece of paper, they are not looking into your accounts. I mean, yeah, online and stuff. So, but when they ask to submit it again, then it might create issue for you. So therefore, it's better to leave it in the aacount for two or three months or until your application is finalized. 





M:	And then what about other things? other documentation? Did you have to do any translation this timeor police checks or at least checks here? 



R:	And what else Yeah, that was the most dreadful period during the entire application process. Then to make something beautiful, yeah. Yeah. And then, um, there's another thing. I mean, before submitting my documents I have to pay the immigration fees. One is the application fees, and other is permanent residency fees, right, which they give you option that either paid now, or you can pay when we’ll decide, Okay, we're going to give you PR, but it is mentioned on their website that if you pay this fees at this stage, then your application will be, you know, your process will be quicker. So, I don't know if it really is but I mean, this is how they're convincing people to pay up front. Yeah. Which is $1100 dollars. It's a money game. So I have to pay that as well this is something that you pay when submit your all documents, right okay, so since I was gathering all the documents for example my police check, my IELTS, then my medical and then my experience letters - I had to call my previous employers requesting them please… For God's sake For God's sake, give me my experience letter, my reference letter but on these formats, so yeah, it also took like two to three weeks and I still haven't got one from one of them so I have to just write to them today that please for God’s sake.



M:	So when we were discussing this stuff about Canada now, yeah. So and, again now does your family, I suppose I also want to ask you with regards to your move to Canada. Does your family know about your considerations and hat? Do they have a role to play here at all? 



R:	No, they don't have any role here, but they know about it. Theyre like okay,  mean, since you're married now, so go wherever you want to go.



M:	Great. Okay. And any social connections that you have in Canada?



R:	Well, I mean, not, I don't know if it's social. No, it's family connection. Like I'm friends with my husband's brothers. And one of his brothers is married. So I also talk to his wife sometime. And theyre in Canada. 





M:	Tell me about your sort of bigger biggest option. stickles the challenges that you faced in your migration process and how you overcame them in both the context of Australia and Canada.



R:	I think in Australia, it was pretty easy for me maybe because I had the scholarship and I didn't have to spend a lot in I didn't have to show any statement. But in terms of Canada, the main main hurdle was this financial thing and showing funds. Otherwise, yeah, it is IELTS I mean, I don't know what's the matter with it because I thought I'm good with English. But when I did this, I didn't get the desired score. So, I had to pay for it again. Then I had to practice because I thought, okay, I didn't practice last time. I was like over, you know, I thought, Oh, I know everything. So now I should spend some time in practicing. And yeah, and spent another 350 dollars in going to the city from here and taking the test and yeah, that was one thing which which I find stressful emotionally because then the whole period of those five days when I was waiting for my result, every night I was like Oh What if I, if I didn't get the desired results of this time then do I have to apply again? I was like very upset with it. And then I mean, thankfully I cleared. So then I was relieved but then the next hurdle was this statement things. So yeah, but somehow sorted out due to my friends.



M:	And with the IELTs test as well. Like, do you practice? Did you take any classes for you practice on your own?



R:	I practiced on my own online, yeah, on IELTS website. So it was like, I was practicing a few modules, only reading and writing. my first test my writing was like 6.5 and I needed seven. But in the second test I got seven in that. But for listening, I mean, the, the requirement for the immigration is that you have to have 8. I had 8.5 in my initial test, but I didn't have seven in my writing. So, I was like, Okay, I fucked up. But yeah, next time I was like, the same scoring but some, you know, improvement in writing. That’s it. My priority was PhD and not immigration. So and I was in the phase of getting admission somewhere. So, and I got it. So I thought why to lose this opportunity and apply for PR.. I don't know if Ill get it or not, but something which I have, tangible - So there is no I mean logic to let it go. So therefore, I chose Australia for PhD. And after I mean, I know that after doing this PhD, I don't want to go back to Pakistan. So that's why I started thinking about applying to immigration and Canada, I mean, because I didn't explore anything about Australia and Canada is something where my husband's family is. So we have that family support family connection. So maybe that's why we're thinking about Canada only and not Australia, but I don't know, maybe after this application I might apply for New Zealand. Whichever option becomes open. 





M:	Husband?



R:	He is in Middle East. And Middle East is I mean, no. I mean, the issue is you don't give you citizenship. So I mean, even if living there, I mean, that's fine for time being but not for longer, longer term and for your future. So therefore, we decided that we need to go to a developed country which offers citizenship. Because Yeah, otherwise, I mean, there's no future in Middle East. So, having a different passport is a powerful thing now in especially coming from a country which has a very bad history and negative, you know, in association with this country, so therefore it's important to change the passport. And that's the main reason. And the other is to have freedom, which is not in home country.



M:	Can you tell me about freedom? What do you mean by freedom?



R:	I mean to be what I want to be okay without being judged. And to do what I like without being scared or without lying or hiding it from family, for example. Okay, I smoke, right. Not a regular smoker, but I like to smoke, and I like to stay out. I like to hang around till late, but of course you have to give a long justification to your family and why, where, with whom! So I mean, I just, I was so upset with these things where I mean, why do I have to tell you the where I'm going, why I'm doing. I'm an adult, I can do whatever I like to do. And I'm, I'm independent as well. But still, I mean these things. And then again, I mean, it's not just a family thing. It's also the society in general that you, you see a lot of harassment on streets. You see, there's no respect for women, for girls. And there is no equality. There's so much politics. And it was like too much for me. And I was like, No, I don't want my life and my future in this kind of environment anymore. In this scared, closed, introverted environment where the girls are not allowed to express. And I mean, same as the case with the boys as well in some situations, but I mean for girls, it's very, very hard to break the barriers and do whatever they like. So that is the reason I, I felt when I was in England, I felt the very first thing that I noticed when I landed on airport was the gender unconsciousness. And that was my first ever exposure to this thing. I didn't know that I was like, oh, everybody's going to look at me everybody's going to stare at my ass and my body. But nobody cares. And that was so fascinating. That I was like, wow, I mean, what kind of world it is. I just want to stay here. But yeah, that's the main reason that I feel freedom is that where you live the way you want to live without being scared or judged by any one.



M:	And in terms of migration advice that you give, so is there any considering that you've got you've gone through these various journey now like and you've, you've considered both Canada and Australia. Have you given any migration advice to anybody? at all?



R:	Yeah, now because a few of my friends, they know that I applied for Canadian immigration. So, they are calling me and asking me or what should I do tell me how to apply for this and IELTS – what scores are required. So yeah, I mean, it's not advice, maybe sharing my experience with them. So yeah, not not really an advice, but I do share with others who are asking me about my experience, either, you know, Australia or in Canada for this immigration thing. 



M:	And I'm going to go back to the technology question. So for Canada, what was some of the technological aspects that you considered how did you conduct research?



R:	I simply used their website CIC to know all the itty bitty of this application. Yeah, so that's it. Nothing else. Because I think it's quite comprehensive, and they have pretty much everything on their website. If you have a question or everything is there, so I didn't feel like asking in on other websites or another social media groups. But of course, I do call my friend who got her PR and to clarify a few things or ask if I can do this or not. So that's all.



M:	Excellent, and you're sponsoring a family member as well. So, you're actually being the sponsor for your husband as well. Is there any sort of challenges or obstacles there in being a sponsor or in being the primary applicant other any like, I was I suppose what I'm asking is that view being a primary applicant versus him being a primary applicant? How did you make that decision? 



R:	Yeah, because I have an MPhil degree and he's only masters. So, his points I consider like for 16 years education and mine are 18 years. So based on that, we thought I mean, because I being a primary applicant will have higher points as compared to him being a primary applicant. So that was the point we thought, okay, that's fine. Ill lodge the application, I’ll become the primary one. Our points for quite higher without his IELTS, so therefore, he didn't get IELTS. But of course, if they ask then he will have to give his IELTS.



M:	What are the next steps in your migration process? And how are you working towards them? So I know that you're collecting documents at the moment. So what are some of the sort of challenges of that? And if there's anything you want to put on the map



R:	um, yeah, collecting documents is tiring as well, making connections with your previous employers. And yeah, I mean, and requesting them to send it to you because I'm not in Pakistan at the moment. So many things are taking extra time as opposed to if I were in Pakistan, so yeah, I mean, that that's that's one thing. Yeah. And for police check, yeah, my husband applied for it on my behalf. And that is quite simple. That's it. Nothing else. So that is one of the reasons that I really want to do my confirmation of candidature as soon as possible because I am planning to do my fieldwork in Canada as well. And I'm trying to provide a rationale of it. And I think I mean, after this confirmation, I if I move to Canada after getting this PR, if I get it, so I mean, maybe I spent six months there, do my fieldwork as well. So, I I'm planning to do my PhD side by side. And, you know, because they have like, you have to spend for certain months to get your PR thing or card, whatever. I don't know. So, after getting that I'll come back to Australia for to complete my PhD.



M:	And what about your husband?



R:	Ah, yeah, we haven't figured out yet. So, he's okay. He said, Oh, can I find a job there maybe because he's also considering to apply for PhD. So, I'm convincing him to apply at Monash because considering my experience with Canada, I'm like, I don't think so you get either but I mean, try your luck. So, he's also to this boat of academia because he's also from research background, so he's, he can apply for PhD as well. So, I don't know maybe maybe here or maybe Canada. 



M:	And are you I'm gonna ask you How do you feel now that you've drawn a map what do you what do you what was your experience of working with the mob?



R:	Um well it's quite good I mean at least I can see now how much money I have spent on all these. I did calculation for this immigration thing but I never did calculation for the application fee so that being for universities, yes, that is quite higher. And okay, that's why now I realized why I’m so low on my savings. Laughs.M:	When did you migrate to Australia?



O:	I migrated to Australia in April 2018. Great 



M:	Motivations?



O:	So, the most important factor for me, because I migrated from Nigeria then I moved to UK and then from UK I migrated to Australia. So, I realised that here in Australia, doing a PhD – the government finds it. Whereas, in the UK you need to get like, a student loan and I didn’t want to commit to a loan so – that’s actually the most important reason as to why I migrated to Australia. I wanted to get my PhD. That’s the most important thing. I migrated to UK as a student even though my mom is a citizen there but in UK you need to have gotten in.. or moved down before you were 18. After 18 it becomes a lot difficult. So, I had to apply as a student. But after the student visa, I waited further to get my indefinite leave to stay there forever. But, when I realised that coming to Australia, I’m able to do my PhD for free, I decided to move. 



M:	When did you move to the UK?



O:	2006. So from 2006, my BSc, I think I finished in 2009, and I did my Masters. I finished in 2010. Then, 2011 2012, I worked a little bit with British Telecom in the UK and that’s when I got the world bank job. So, I moved back to Nigeria because the project was focused on in Nigeria and Kenya. So, I moved down there. So, I was working on the project coz it was funded by the world bank and CFI. CFI is the – they provide aids to African countries on behalf of the British government so I was actually moving from Nigeria to UK but I was actually working closely with Nigeria. So yea, from 2012 to 2015, no 16, I was pretty much in Nigeria. Then I moved back to UK. I did some work but before then, prior to then, I think around 2013, that was when I actually got my PR for Australia. So, because my wife, she actually studied here at The university of Queensland. That’s where she finished. But when she finished reading there, she went back to Nigeria. So, she was the one who told me how beautiful Melbourne was, and I decided to give it a try. So, 2013, that is when I actually applied for the PR, the 189 visa, and I got it in 2013 but they give you 5 years basically, to prepare your properties to sell, etc. After I got it, I came to Melbourne just for like, 2 weeks, just to see whether I liked it and I did. So, I went back to Nigeria then continued my World bank job. Then 2018 – that was when the 5 year period that they gave me was going to expire. So, I decided to move. I think I actually entered Australia 2 days before it was going to expire, and the guy looked at me at the border and was like, “did you actually wait 5 years”. I was like well!! Laughs.



M:	Ethnic background



O:	Well, I grew up in Nigeria but my undergraduate and my, most of my education from my college years, I started in the UK because my mom went to UK and my dad moved after then. But my primary and secondary was in Nigeria. 



M:	Professional background?



O:	The jobs I’ve been working at World Bank, I’ve been a Business Analyst. When I was in BT, I did a little bit of Software Development. But, I did it just for like, a year and then I moved into Business Analyst because I just tired of writing codes. I became a Business Analyst. Then, when I with World Bank in Nigeria I was a BA, but then I moved to be a product owner and product manager, then project manager. So, I was more or less managing the IT intervention. With the WB role, they had different interventions and each of the intervention, they used different IT companies. So, I was like, the IT manager. Even though I do a little bit of Business Analysis – I try to map the processes from A to Z. But I also liked the product owner, the whole signing off any development. I was pretty much the IT manager and also the Business Analyst. That’s always been what I have been doing. So, when I moved down to Australia, the first place where I worked was a government agency in Victoria. It was pretty much similar to what I was doing in Nigeria. What they do in Film Victoria is that they support people from the entertainment industry and the games industry. You submit an idea. You submit online, and if its good enough, the Victorian government will give you money. So, the idea is to bring the movies you wanna shoot, you bring it Victoria. That way, they can create jobs, they give you incentives to bring your productions down to Australia. That way, you give people jobs and train people how to shoot movies, and how you do all these things.  So, it was pretty much similar to what I was doing in Africa where the wold bank supports the business plan. If its good enough, they give you the grant to support your business. So, I was able to fit into that job because, yeah, maybe it’s a different sector, its still the same process. The technology is the same. 



M:	Plan



O:	Like I told you, I moved just 2 days before the expiration, so it took me 5 years to plan it. Is it before I applied to it? Umm, before I applied for it, to be honest, we were dating then and so that was my wife – we were dating, and she was the one who told me about it and I was still a young guy in the UK. I was a bit tired of UK because I was writing codes and it was just all getting a bit boring for me you know; at that stage of my life I just wanted to explore and do something different. So, when she told me, I was like okay maybe I should give it a try. I’ll see how it is. I mean, I’ve been hearing about Australia, but I’ve never dreamt about going there. So, it was just out of, it was…just for fun. Yeah, and within 2 months or 3 months I got it. So, it wasn’t… there wasn’t a drive for me to do it. I just did it out of pleasure and I got it. And I know people are trying really hard. 



M:	How did you learn about the options?



O:	Yeah, so most of the researches I did were online. So, when she told me I went online. So, there are these forums, so there’s this forum in Nigeria called Nairaland and it actually for the love of people. So, right now I’m a member and what we do is we just give people advice on how to make their journey. So, I think the forum was very very helpful to a lot of Nigerians trying to migrate to USA, to Canada, to Australia. You know, there are different people there. You just post your questions and they add things. I also used a lot of forums on British expats so another forum. So, most of the research was online. I got most of the things online. I checked online everything they wanted. I ensured I ticked all the boxes they had coz it was the points-based system, so you need to be between a certain age range, you need to have certain level of experience, education etc. So, you get points for all these things. So, I did the research online and when I realised, I met all these criteria, I applied online. 



M:	Family



O:	My parents were cool. They were a bit surprised though, coz my mom, she is a citizen in the UK and my dad as well. So, they were like, why do you need to go to Australia, like, you are cool in the UK. You can start your life here, and my mom then, she actually had a mortgage you know, and my brothers, one is in America, one in Canada. So, it was just my mom and me. So, she desperately needed someone to stay. And I was like, oh I wanna go to Australia. She was like, come on, just stay so you can continue paying the mortgage and take care of me. I was like, I’m tired of UK. I just want to do something different. So, well, but they supported me. I was like if I go to Australia, I can get to do my PhD, and spend as little as possible rather than get a loan in the UK. So, yeah, they supported me and assisted me, and whatever I asked them, they were able to assist me. We are 4 boys, and I am the last one. Yeah, so, one of my brothers stays in the UK now. He migrated back to UK with his family. One stays in America and one is in Canada, and I am here in Australia. 



M:	Community



O:	No. The only person I knew in Australia then was my wife and we just met. We met in Nigeria. When she finished her school she moved back down to Nigeria, and at that time I was working on the project in Nigeria and that’s how we met. So, I didn’t know anyone in Australia. She was the only one. I like, pretty much only knew about Australia through her. But, when I got the PR, the 5 year gap, I started knowing some friends, yeah I knew the medical doctor in Geelong, now has his own practice, So, I started knowing people bit before I made the application, I did not know anyone. It was from friends. So back I the UK, I think when I started telling people that I’ll be going to Australia. So someone would say, oh my brother is in Australia, I can link you guys up. Oh my friends study in Australia, oh my wife is there. So, I think it started happing because I started telling people that I’ll probably be moving to Australia soon. So that’s pretty much how. 



M:	What about wife?



O:	So, the problem is that, like, I’ve learnt that the hard way, I think, information is very important. So, when I applied for it, we were not married. We were just dating. So, I didn’t know that you could actually add, there’s something called the de facto. I didn’t know about that. I just thought that you have to be married. So, I didn’t add her to my application. I actually mentioned that I dated her. I just didn’t add her as an applicant. So, if I had known I would have added her to my application but I didn’t know. So, I applied separately. So, I tried as much as it was possible to try and see if I could add her but I couldn’t. Some people told me that it’s better that I moved down to Australia first, get myself an apartment. It will show that I have something, that I can take care of them. So, at one point, I just thought about maybe I should cancel the one I did and apply a new one and I could include her. But then I was like I don’t wanna go through that whole thing again and spend $6000 again. So I was like, okay I’ll just go first on my own. So now, I started asking questions to people so they can advise me what I should do because, and, honestly that was one of the reasons why I didn’t move. Like, it took me 5 years to move because I was thinking that do I wanna leave all these things that I’m doing, I have a great job at world back, so do I wanna leave that and stay away from my family for more than a year? And for what? And it was not like I am desperate, you know, like, do I wanna go through all this pain? And, I was just like, you know, God wanted me to move to Australia. That’s why I got it very easily. And someone advised that another option for me was to start the whole process again and I was like, no I don’t think so. So, she’s in the UK. She’s just waiting for her visa to come through. She’s on the, coz I’m on the indefinite leave, she’s on that too. It’s like the permanent residence, but it’s not like the PR, like you can stay in the UK for ever, and after a while you can apply for a citizenship. I never got it before I left because I just never cared much about it. As long as it gives you the opportunity to stay forever, so, that was fine by me. And now I don’t care for it too much because I don’t wanna be jumping around. 



M:	Visa availability 



O:	Actually, I did. I looked at different options. There was a state nomination coz then I was. You know, it’s all about the points. Even though, I got the points based on my years of experience, my age, my school, I was lucky to also go to a school, like you get additional points if your school is one of the top universities in the world, you get 5 points – then. I don’t know about now but then, if you school was amongst the top 400 you get extra 5 points. So, yeah, it’s all about information. I went to University Essex and it was in the top so I got additional 5 points for that. I did all the calculations. I needed 65 points. So, I got the 65 points but for you to get nominated – it is based on the number of your points – the higher, the better. So, I said to myself, ah, maybe I just should go and do IELTS coz if I do IELTS, and I pass it, I can get up to 20 PR 10 points. So, the thing is, because Nigeria, we are English speaking and maybe because I was in the UK, I didn’t need it. Coz, I remember I actually asked, and they said I didn’t need it. I don’t know. Again, that’s the question – who needs IELTS? I just know I didn’t need it. I just did it coz I could add more points. I actually did it twice, so crazy!. So basically, you can’t score below 7 in each band. The first time I scored 8 in each band and I scored 6.5 in the listening and that invalidates you. And I was like, are you sure you’re just not trying to make me do it for a second time. So, I did it again and I scored better. So, I scored 10 points more from IELTS. I thought about the state sponsorship but I realised for the state sponsorship, the requirements for IELTS was a bit low so I considered that and one of my friends has a brother who is a medical doctor. He actually went through the state route. I think it was based on, I think it was for Canberra. I think he only recently moved down to Melbourne after he finished the 3 years. So, I thought about that. But, the thought of restricting myself somewhere for 2 years, I don’t like it. I like being free, you know. If I’m tired of Melbourne, I can decide to move down to Sydney. If I’m tired of Sydney, I can decide to go to Canberra. So, I didn’t like the thought of staying somewhere for 2 years. What if I can’t find a job where I am that I like? That’s why I said, okay, let me just do the 189 so I’m free, I can go anywhere I choose to go. 



M:	State?



O:	I did, I actually researched on Sydney. I checked also on Tasmania. I also did further research in terms of, which of the states has more IT roles. So, I realised its either Sydney or Melbourne. Most of the other places like Tasmania is more on tourism, hospitality, and that’s not what I do. So, I studied for Sydney and Melbourne. The problem of Sydney is that – when I research between Sydney and Melbourne, which one is better – and everyone was like, ah Sydney is like London. So busy, and everyone is working, and you have to move fast. I didn’t like that vibe. That’s why I got tired of the UK. It was too fast for me. It’s like Nigeria in Lagos, everything is so fast. You need to be street-wise, you need to be so sharp and I don’t like that. I like Melbourne – its relaxed, its laid back. So yeah, I just decided I’ll stay in Melbourne. But its changing. I was telling my friend that when I came in 2014 – it was so calm and I was like “oh I love this place” and when I came in 2018, I’m like, “really! Whats going on here, It’s so busy”.  



M:	Mapping 



O:	I left Nigeria in 2006 on a student visa. So, when I finished my Masters - 2011, I moved back to Nigeria. In Nigeria we have this one-year national youth service. It’s called NYSE. So, basically you serve your country for a year. If you graduate before the age of 40, you need to serve the country. So, the whole idea is to find a way to integrate everyone. So they, if you’re like, from the West – I’m from the West – Lagos, they send you to another region of the country. So, that way you try to understand the cultures, and you get to integrate. It is good but I think that because they want to encourage foreign students so when you come, they give you the liberty to choose where you wanna go. When I went, I just decided that I was gonna choose Abuja. Abuja is the central capital. Its mandatory. Like, for example, the world bank job that I did, I wouldn’t be able to do that if I had not done the NYSE. You must have it. As long as you graduated before the age of 40, you must do the NYSE, else, you can’t hold a position in Nigeria. We do military training for 3 weeks out of the 1 year. Sometimes, they post you at a school – you get to teach people, do ICT stuff, they can post you to hospitals, to banks. So, they can post you anywhere for work for rest 11 months. But, for 1 month you do para-military training. I went back to Nigeria for the youth service. So, 2012, I finished it in 2012 and I went back to UK. I was working with British Telecom. I worked there for 2 years till 2014, and I went back to Nigeria. So, 2014, I went back to Nigeria. So, I applied for  - so, 2013 – that was when I applied for my PR. So, I think that should come first. So, that’s when I applied for it. So, after I got the PR, I still went back to Nigeria. So, 2014-2018, I was working the world bank job in Nigeria. I was moving to London as well, but mostly based in Nigeria. 



M:	So, was your wife moving back and forth with you?



O:	It was only when I decided to mov back to UK, was when she moved with me as well. So, we got married in 2015. So, then, I think it was 2014 to 2018, I moved to UK back in 2017. 2012-2018 I moved to UK. I just wanted to spend a few months before I would fly down to Australia because my PR would expire. So, 2018 April, arrived in Australia. 





M:	Wait time, processing time.



O:	The first thing is to submit your documents to the body in charge of ICT in Australia – ACS. So, I submitted the documents to ACS. I paid the fees. I think I got the result in about 3 weeks to a month. So, after that, I submitted an EOI to immigration, and after I submitted it – after like 3 weeks after that I got an invite. Then I did IELTS. I got the result after 2 weeks. Then when I submitted the application. I remember I started the journey in 2012 September-ish. I remember it was January 2013 when I got the grant letter. 



M:	Commercial services



O:	I only used agent – I only spoke to lawyer when I wanted to apply for my wife. I wanted to understand how the partner visa works. When I read on the forums that its very complicated, so I wanted to get as much information as possible. So, I spoke to a lawyer about okay what’s the process for bringing my wife over to Australia. Basically, I already knew the process because I did my research, but I wanted to see if there’s any faster approach to get my wife over. I know you can apply, and it takes 14-19 months, but I thought there should be another way to do it. Unfortunately, now I know that that was one of my biggest mistakes. If I had known that I would have just stuck to my online research because the agent – well – she was gonna do the application for me and she was gonna charge like, $3000 or $4000. She’s actually based in Sydney. When I told her, oh actually I’m a graduate, I can read, I did my PR myself, I can do it myself. So, rather than speaking $3000-4000, I can do it myself. So, she wasn’t very happy about it. So, she probably didn’t give me as much information as she should have given me. For example, when I was concerned that now I am waiting for that 14 months to 19 months, is there any way to bring my wife to come join me temporarily?, and everyone I spoke to – were like, the fact that you’ve applied for her, the partner visa, if you now apply for a visitor visa, the immigration will know that you want this woman to just come and meet you cox they’ll see that application and most likely will reject it. So, then like, mostly what agents advise before was that she should apply for the visitor visa first. When she’s in the country, you apply for the partner visa. That way, she goes into the bridging. The agent I spoke to, the lawyer, she didn’t tell me any of this. I applied last year August so it’s going to be one year. I paid the lawyer for the consultation. I paid $200 for one hour. We have to go to the court to certify all my documents. I also paid to the ACS – I think I paid about $400 to validate my degree. I paid for police reports – I needed from both the UK and Nigeria. Let’s just say 100 pounds. Let’s just say $30 for documents certification. IELTS was like $150 each so $300 for IELTS. Medical was roughly about $200. And then my wife and child had to do this – yeah yeah. In fact, that is what is getting me. Currently, we did the medical and the document certification, and the police report, and I read online that sometimes it only lasts for 12 months. That means, we’ll have to do it again. Coz she, she’s a diplomat, and ambassador. So, she actually stayed in Pakistan, in Islamabad. So, she went through a lot to actually get the police report. She just got it, actually, just last month. So, it took her about 5-6 months to get it. So, when I read online about 12 months, to actually go through that process again, I’m worried – I don’t even wanna think about that, to get that Pakistan one. I mean, the Nigerian and UK were were okay. But the Pakistan one, I don’t wanna go through it again. Yes. So, her degree was actually, between Pakistan and Australia. So, she did 2 years in Pakistan and the third year in Australia. So, I think it was a joint collaboration between the university in Pakistan and the university in Australia. She did IELTS as well because I remember she was bragging that she scored better than me. My daughter also had to do the medicals. She’s 4. Probably I spend about $400 for medical for both of them. What about the fees for the spouse visa? That’s the biggest one. It was $7600. I paid like, $9000 something for my daughter and wife – that’s what I paid. I was like what! I was thinking it was better she applied while I was still in Nigeria. But, most of my friends said it would be difficult because they expect you as a sponsor, to be in Australia, to have settled down. So, that was why we did it this way. The five years that were waiting, maybe we should have done it. But it would have been very difficult. Then I travelled back to UK and Nigeria to go see them because I was missing them. And I’m still thinking of visiting them this year in Christmas as well. That’s expenses – that’s part of it. It’s a lot. It’s not easy.  I think it’s about $2000 for every return journey. I had to pay for biometrics. But that wasn’t expensive. That was like $150. 



M:	Technology



O:	I used two online blogs – Nairaland – it is very popular in Nigeria. I also used British Expats. So, both of them are like blogs. So, people share ideas on their journeys, their timeline. How they applied for their visa, you know, just the journey they went through to get their visa. Those 2 blogs were the 2 that I used extensively. I’m actually still active on Naira land. Now I tend to give advice to people. So, now I tell people, hey if you’re married, put your wife on your application. Now, I’m actually active. I don’t know much about other visa’s but now I do know about the 189 PR route. Its one forum but there are different threads. So, there’s a thread for Canada, there a thread for America, there’s one for Australia. So, I only post on the Australia one. Even the UK, I don’t know much because when I did the student visa, I was young. The Australia one, I did myself. The UK one, my mom, my dad, they did the application for me. Apart from Nairaland, now there’s a WhatsApp group. So, those of them who moved from Nigeria to Australia, and used Nairaland, so theres a WhatsApp group. We all chat about the experiences and all that. But, it’s strictly for those who have been successful in their journey to discuss experiences of moving, finding work and so on. It was actually from there that I learnt that I should have actually applied for the partner. There are some people on the group who are actually migration agents, but I didn’t know that. So, they were the ones that were telling me, Oh the agent you spoke to didn’t do justice. They help you to get cheap houses once you’re in Australia, how to get cheap cars. I think it’s a closed group. And, its about 150 users. It is invite only. So, once you tell them that you came from Nairaland, they ask you for your name on Naira Land. Everyone has a unique name on Naira Land. So, they’re going to check you out to see that truly you used to comment on the thread, and from there they will add you to the group. I never met anyone from the group physically. The first person I met was just 3 days ago. He is here for like 3 or 4 years, but he’s been finding it difficult to get a job. So, I told him that I’m lucky, I’ve not only been here 3 years and I’ve already changed jobs twice. So, I was telling him maybe you can do you CV differently. It’s more like a data science CV but I think right now, a lot of people are looking for BA, BI. I just tried to help him do his CV to get a job. So he’s the only person I actually met. Mostly, we just communicate online.



M:	Getting a job. 



O:	When I got here in April, I was lucky, maybe because I was in a strategic position where I was working at. So, they actually allowed me to work remotely. So, even when I was in Australia, I was still working for the World bank project. So, I didn’t need to get a job. I told my wife that I’m just gonna finish the project… Its gonna be different because of the time zones and all. When its morning in Australia its night in Nigeria. So, I was like, I’m gonna be working 24 hours. So, for the first 2 months, I don’t even wanna work in Australia. I’m just gonna focus on my project and apply for my DL, get an apartment, you know, just settle in. So, for the first 2 months I didn’t really apply for any jobs. I was just doing the work I had. So, at some point, I started getting a bit bored. Yeah, when I moved here, one of my friends, that someone introduced me to. He was staying in Point cook. So, I stayed in his house for 2-3 months before I got my apartment. So, even though I said I wasn’t gonna apply for a job, but you know in the morning, he was living with his wife, so they both go to their workplace and I’m the only one who’s home. And I was like, uhh, even though I was working on the project, it was just so boring.  So, after about 2 months, I started applying. It was too boring for me – this is gonna kill me. So, I started learning some things. I was getting these rejection emails – oh sorry, we found a better candidate bla bla bla. I was like, I’m very qualified, like, whats happening. I realised that a lot of these companies, if you don’t have local experience, it’s difficult to get a job and I don’t like it because IT is a general language. Whether, it is in India, Pakistan, Nigeria – it is the same code. So, I just, I didn’t understand the whole rationale behind local experience. So as I was doing that, I saw this ad for this charity, they work for vulnerable women and children who are exposed to domestic violence. So, they try to teach them how to defend themselves – so self-awareness and self-defence classes. So, you come to them and then they assess you and realise oh you have issues, they out you through to some self-defence classes to boost your self-confidence. And so, I saw the ad online that they were looking for research analyst. So, I sent my CV to her and she liked it. She called me for an interview, and I got it. So that actually kept me engaged for that period while I was home. I advised them how can do things differently, for example they can have a website where people can fill a form, have a social media handle, people can always reach you online rather than come to your physical office. So, I did a lot of research and also helped them define the process. I’m actually still doing it. It’s a pro bono thing so whenever they need my service, I try to help them. I actually got my first job in 3 months and this volunteer work helped coz even when I went for my interview for the government job, I was one the top and it came down to my references. So, I gave them a reference from my World Bank job and mostly Nigeria and UK and they were like, no we need an Australian reference. I’m like, you saw in my CV, I never worked in Australia, how can I give you an Australian reference. So the guy was like, see, he liked me, I was a top applicant, so he said even if it’s a friend. So, I then realised that I can ask the lady from the charity work I am doing. So, she said yes, shes gonna be my reference. So they used her and one of my UK references. 



M:	Social connections



O:	Most of the influence that technology has had was when I got here. So, when I got here, like I told you, I was getting a lot of rejection letters. So, I read online that sometimes you just go on LinkedIn and if you see someone, if you either worked together or went to the same university, you can just send a message to the person, chat with them and maybe have a coffee, try to see if they have an opening in their office and ask them to be a referral. So, I actually did that. The first person I met – I saw an opening in Commonwealth bank. They guy was from Nigeria and worked in Commbank so I was like hey bro, whats up man, can you just be a referral, and he said no he can’t do that. I was like why, and he was like coz he doesn’t know me. I was like, hey it’s not a reference, its just a referral – like you’re the one telling me to apply for this job. He said, yeah, he doesn’t feel comfortable. I was surprised, I was really really disappointed. But anyway, I actually met another guy. He’s a consultant. Hes a Nigerian – hes into ML. I saw him on Social media, and I messaged him and he was like yeah, come meet me for a coffee. So, I sat down with him and he just told me, like oh, the way you did your CV, it’s too – like in Australia, they wanna see your acheivements, like, whatever you have achieved. My CV was just like I worked there, this is what I did. So, I didn’t have a proper CV. So, while we were having this discussion, he realised that I was very good with some of the tools that they currently used in Australia – like CRM, tableau, but on my CV it wasn’t there. So, he was like you need to put all that on your CV, they like to see all that stuff here. So, I had to redo my CV and I ensured that I listed all those things, and yeah I got the job. So, social media mostly helped me after I moved here. You know, I always tell people that, information is the most important thing that anyone can have. You know why? You know when I moved down to Melbourne, I didn’t buy a car. It was only me so I was always jumping on the bus. And at some point I was like, my wife and my daughter will join me so I should just get a car. It took me about 6-7 months to get a car and the only reason was, I didn’t want to go through doing the driving test, and all that. I know I can drive. The guy I stayed with when I moved here told me that I need to do my driving test and all that. So, one day, I was just browsing online, and I realised that if you have a UK license, just take it there they can just swap it. Just that. I didn’t know that because the guy told me I have to go through the whole driving test. And I was like oh, I don’t wanna do that. I just wanna focus on my job, on my life, bring my family down. I don’t wanna go through this driving test. I can always just on the bus or tram and you know the funny thing, that this guy – so initially I thought oh maybe he doesn’t know this because he’s never been to the UK. But, his wife is actually American, so he told her the same thing. So, I took my UK licence and they swapped it, and gave me the Australian license. And I called him and said listen man, don’t tell your wife to go. And he was still arguing with me that No! that’s not possible. I just told him I just did it. He was telling me that he’s been living in Australia for 10 years and he knows. So, then the wife called me, and I told her that just pay the application fee, and they will change it. So, it was then I realised that information is very important. Sometimes, don’t just listen to what other people say, even if the person has been here for 10 years. Just research yourself, go online, ask questions. I can add LinkedIn on the map. 





M:	Immigration policies



O:	I think the partner visa is crap. I mean, if theres, let me tell you something. I think about 2 months ago I sent an email to the MP – the local MP and like, how can you keep a family away for 2 years – a partner? That is breaking the whole family itself. What is the purpose of it. They were like, they look at it to validate if the marriage is genuine because theres a lot of scam. I was like, yeah but like, honestly, I’m talking to here one-on-one. Theres some arguments I am having with my wife and when I was in the UK and Nigeria with her, I didn’t have these arguments in her. But now, because of this visa theres a lot of frustration, like shes the only one taking care of the child, shes so tired coz she needs to work, shes got her own business – she does cupcakes, she takes the child to school, she works, does the housework, sometimes these little, little things, we have started arguing about it. When I was with her, we never argued so much. So, it actually causes a lot of triggers on small things, and I don’t understand why these guys don’t think about that. You are actually breaking a family with all these checks – youre breaking my family. For me, that is the part which is not fair, its not right. If I had known, honestly, that it was gonna be this difficult, I probably wouldn’t have moved to Australia. I would have just stayed in the UK. Why would I not want to stay with my family, my daughter, she’s just 3 years old. Its torture. I understand like yeah, okay maybe there’s a lot of scam going on, or things like arranged marriages, I understand. But, you cant punish genuine people. No matter what you tell me, when you keep families, especially newly married or young couple away fro so long, there is no way you are not breaking, like somehow, you are breaking their relationship. You are breaking the bond. You end up saying things to each other, yeah you’re angry but you still said it. And for me that’s the most, I don’t think it’s fair, and honestly to be frank with you, a lot of people I spoke to, they always think that Australia is more racist than other places, and its one of the reasons they feel that, especially when you’re from Africa, they feel that you’re not genuine. British people who apply for partner visas, some of them, they get it 4-5 or 6 months. So, why would someone from India, Pakistan, Nigeria spend 18 months – for what! Why? Its just nor fair. I know of people who applied from the UK and got it within 4-5 months. So, why should it be different – just because someone applied it from Africa or Asia. I don’t think its right. I got so frustrated; I actually wrote a letter to the MP. I was like listen man, if you don’t want people to come, how can you tell me, I’m an honest person, I came here, I work here, I pay my taxes. And the little thing, for me to bring my family, I can’t even enjoy it. Think about it – I resigned from my job, I decided to make the move thinking that would improve my life and be good for my family, and now I have to wait for 2 years to see them. It’s really not cool. 



M:	Future plans



O:	To be honest with you, its just bringing my family. When my family are here, my daughter starts school, my wife starts – either she continues her business, her cupcake business or she start working in a company, after everyone is settled, I think my future plan is to go for that PhD. That is what brought me to Australia. If I live here, and I don’t achieve it, I think I would have failed. I have to do it. That’s why I came. You know, women, my wife, she is telling me that make sure you don’t buy a house, we need to do it together. I don’t care. She needs to see the place. Yeah so some of the plans ate PhD, getting a house.





M:	Would you consider migration elsewhere?



O:	No – I don’t wanna go through that again. I would go but not my family. My wife loves Australia, I don’t know why. She was the one pushing me. I would like to work in Qatar. I’m open to that. The good thing about world bank projects is that you can move around. But that would happen when my family is fully stabilised. I can’t do that now. Again, that’s one of the pain I am feeling with this kind of migration – it makes things difficult for me for planning. I love planning maybe because I’m a business analyst. I have to have a process in my head before I do anything. So, the whole migration stuff – because my wife if not here. It’s a bit difficult to make a definite plan. For example, I would have gotten a mortgage by now. My bank already offered me a loan to buy a house, but I don’t wanna do anything until my wife comes. My business, I’m thinking of starting a business in Australia – my wife – since she has this cupcake business, I’m thinking that we can partner together. I’ll do the IT part – IT and delivery, she can focus on the production of the cakes. So, we can work together. For me, it’s about the business. Yeah – this 9-5 job, it pays the bill but satisfaction is coming from ideas. I wanna come up with solutions, innovative things.M:	When did you first migrate you Australia?



H:	That would be 7 years ago – 2012. So, that was the original 457. That was – I came to work as a postdoc. 



M:	What were the motivations?



H:	So, the whole academic background means that you get some options. You weigh the options and then it’s kind of a given that you will probably be moving countries every time you get a different appointment. So, I suppose it’s a little bit idiomatic in that sense. The main factors we considered at the time – there were a few things. So, first of all, the job was great. So, I really wanted to do the thing. So, this was basically when I was still in my career of astronomy. I had already done a Postdoc in the US and I was looking for the next step. We didn’t really want to stay in the US and there were a few factors – a few reasons for that, and we were looking for places that had a few of the things that kind of annoyed us about living in the US. One of the – so there are a few logistical reasons – very mundane things, not really emotional things. There was, first of all, there’s 2 of us and there’s one job offer. My wife didn’t have a job offer so were like okay, what is a place that won’t hassle her for employment. And, at the time Australia was possibly the only place - that where the spouse visa was completely free. You could do whatever you like, you know, work. We would’ve had that only in the EU otherwise because I’m an EU citizen. We could go to the EU and me and my wife could work there – just defacto. No hassle. But, in other places that’s not the case. In other places that we’ve lived even, that’s not the case. So, yeah weren’t looking at going back to Europe then. We were looking for another adventure. So, in here it was possible for my wife to get a job. So, that worked really well. Another thing that I considered at the time was basically long-term career stuff. This is previous career, obviously in science. So, I was thinking, you know, what is the place where there is decent Science funding, and at the time it was very good. You know 2012 – there were all these fellowships, they were open to everybody. Different discussion – obviously that changed after we got here. So, I think the facts at the time were career specific, opportunities for both of us, a place where cost of living wouldn’t be a huge problem for a Postdoc salary. In the short term, we didn’t know what our plans would be for the long-term. Obviously, Postdocs don’t make enough to live here long-term, buy houses, and all that stuff but for a 3-year contract it seemed fantastic and it was very good. And then, there were some other considerations that were – like once all these boxes were ticked then we thought about bigger things, you know, what are the – I realised, as I say this, it was so nerdy, so statistically kind of informed. So, everything was looking at like society stats. What is the Gini coefficient in Australian society like, things like that, coz – slight tangent but we lived in Chile for a while. It was a wonderful experience to live but the inequality is something that bothered me every day there. Even though our jobs were the jobs that were creating more equality, it was still very difficult to live in a place like that. So, I didn’t want to move to a place that, again, there would be so much inequality. So, that was a consideration and those kind of things. That’s the stuff that pops to mind. 





M:	Where is home?



H:	Greece. But I lived in Chile, in the UK for and US. It was all for Science. So, I went to the UK to study. Then, I went to Chile to do some extra projects for my PhD. Then I was in the US for a postdoc and UK for a postdoc. So, it was absolutely all for the Science career. Astrophysics. Now, [career] its so-called Data Science. So, umm, when was this, 4 years ago? Maybe May-ish, April, something like that of 15. I moved. Yeah, at that point everything changed. Now, the observatory I was working for doesn’t even exist anymore. It was a really famous observatory – like world famous research facility in Sydney. The headquarters were in Sydney. And, they disbanded the observatory. Thankfully, The Australian National University took over the telescope. So, the telescope is gone into good use. But, yeah, the shorter version of it is, the government changed a year after I moved, and everything changed. It was like, where there were all these opportunities, so much funding, the funding was cut. Where there were fellowships, the fellowship programs were cut and the ones that were maintained were only open to Australian citizens. So, I wasn’t eligible to apply for anything. So, essentially professorships maybe. I would’ve been eligible for professorships, but it wasn’t what I wanted to do. I wanted to be a researcher. So, it’s just, everything changed overnight. That was pretty traumatic. So, then I had to pretty much – what we thought at the time was – okay, do we want to move countries again, and just have to kind of start over once again, or do we like it here enough to just stick around and find another job? Which was obviously a huge decision you know. I decided to me an astronomer when I was 8 years old, so did Milly. That’s like 25 years of decision making at that point. Everything is geared toward being an astronomer and remaining in this field. So, to switch away from that was quite a big deal. I lost track of the original question. [laughs]. So, current profession, yeah. So, 2015 when my postdoc was about to expire and then I looked for another job and Data Science was kind of, the obvious switch coz a lot of places were hiring at the time, and it was becoming very trendy, and it was basically a job where I could do the data analysis, do the research, which is what I wanted to do in Astronomy, but would kind of, have to give up to be a professor anyway. So, then I worked at another company as a Data Scientist. 



M:	Planning



H:	Yeah, there was a fair bit. The way it works in Astronomy – you get – there are so few jobs. I mean, the whole global community of Astronomers is about 5000 people. That’s it. We kind of all know each other. So, when you apply for jobs, it’s very unlikely that you get more than one offer, if you get any. So, you keep looking until you get an offer. So, I had yeah, there was an opportunity to stay in the US, go to California. I wasn’t thrilled about the specifics of that role, that Postdoc. And then, the opportunity to come here. And then, also I could’ve just kept looking. When this came about, it just sounded very exciting. So, there was a lot of consideration obviously. But, kind of the appeal of, you know – let’s just go to Australia for 3 years – great, let’s just do that. That really shortened the consideration time because we thought it would be a fun adventure. I’d never been here but, you know, people seem to have fun here, and lot of astronomers were coming here, and they would all just say, oh, you know, it’s a wonderful place. It seems like a good place to be. So, that kind of, shortened the decision time. But yes, there was a lot of consideration – the main consideration was, the main kind of rival in that thing was, trying to figure out something in Canada because we have a lot of colleagues there, and Canada was – the stuff that we starting going through after we got here – Canada has starting going through then. So, they had started restricting fellowships to citizens and things like that. So, we were very close to getting jobs in Victoria in Canada, which was what we really wanted at the time. It was our absolute dream and then the government changed there, and we couldn’t do that. So, with a few doors closing around the world, that also shortened the decision time. There just weren’t that many options. So, once things was, kind of a clear favourite, then we took a few weeks to figure out, really, just the appeal was there, but were just trying to figure out –just the logistics of it all. You know, astronomers are not like, money bag kind of people. It was extremely difficult to go through the process of how much cost and to get here, and make sure, that there’s a bank account, and there’s money somewhere – it was a big freak out. Very very difficult situation. So, it was big decision. We took all the time we had until the observatory wanted an answer. 



M:	Multiple options?



H:	Right. What were told at the time, was that this was the only option. That wasn’t true. That was not the fact. Every time I’ve asked a question of people who are supposed to know what they are talking about, I get the wrong answer, and I make, I’ve made this mistake many times over the 7 years we’ve lived here. I trust somebody, some expert to tell me what to do, and I find out a year later that it was a terrible decision. It was completely wrong, and everything is just the worst-case scenario. I found out pretty much the day I landed here from one of my colleagues at ANU that – umm – this is a very high up person. He has a direct line to immigration case worker, whatever it’s called. When he wants to bring in somebody from abroad, he picks up the phone and gets that one person on the phone and says, I have a Postdoc, this is a brilliant person, and I need PR. That’s how it worked. Apparently. Yeah. That’s not supposed to happen. But that’s the story I was told. Yeah so, getting people on PR was possible but to me it was presented as absolutely, the only option you have is the 457 visa and then bla bla bla bla. So, Postdocs there were her for – I don’t know how that worked because on paper, that shouldn’t because there’s not ongoing employment. Postdocs are usually fixed term appointment. So, I don’t know how they did that. But yeah, bunch of people went to the ANU on PR directly. 



M:	Family and their role. 



H:	Yeah. So, that’s a very interesting topic. The decision was really, just my wife and I decided we would have this adventure, and probably just only stay here for 3 years because that’s how long the contract was. When we decided that – obviously my whole family are back in Europe. So, there’s nobody in this hemisphere even. So, that was definitely a consideration. So, in the beginning it was – oh this is only for 3 years and then ah we’ll see, we’ll probably go back to Europe because that’s a sensible thing to do. It hasn’t gone that way but at the time, I didn’t think so much about my family back home because I thought this was just a short-term thing and we’ll just get to experience it and probably move somewhere else close to home. Not to Greece. It was never a consideration, just realistically, it was never like that. But, yeah, it wasn’t, so I guess it was definitely part of the consideration. But, I guess, it was sort of, that’s okay because it was just a short-ish period. 



M:	Friends/community



H:	No – we. Apart from professional contacts, we didn’t. And even there, uhh, well actually no. That’s interested. When we moved here, there was actually one person I knew at work whom I knew from the US, and but my wife, he whole – So, I don’t know how this happened. Nobody knows how this happened. So, her whole year, everybody who did their PhD at Oxford in her year were here when we moved here. Everybody her year, everybody the year above, everybody the year below. So many of those people were here doing Postdocs. So, yeah, my wife’s friend circle were already here. I can’t remember if we knew that or if that just happened at the same time. I can’t remember if everybody just moved at the same time as we did. I can’t remember if that was already known when we decided to move here. I think we knew that 1 or 2 people were here. Not like, 10 people. So, that was very lucky. That was the main kind of, social group in the first couple of years that we were here. All Postdocs – and then one or two people who moved here later had been Postdocs and then they moved into different jobs. They’ve all gone now. Mostly, they’ve all gone back to wherever, mostly back to the UK coz everything changed with the funding. 





M:	Visa process



H:	Umm, that. So, I think I would’ve got the job offer around February and I think, the process was done by April or something. I remember booking flights and booking movers in April. My Postdoc there was ending in May, and we were… I remember we had like a 3-month, kind of runway, from the moment that we go to visa to having to be here. So, I think I was here something like the end of June. So, it would’ve been April when the thing was granted, and February was the job offer. So, couple of months – 6 weeks, 2 months. I remember it being very quick. I remember it being very cheap also at that time. 



M:	Skilled



H:	I think my Science background is the skill. Its everything in that package, even if people don’t quite get what that means. That’s the skill. My aptitude of statistics and strategy in numbers, programming, that sort of thing. The original occupation, Physicist, was on the skills list. It isn’t anymore. Physicist can only be sponsored by universities now. Hence, I am on a 457 visa still. 



M:	Mapping



H:	So, were in the US and we apply for a 457. This is February 2012. Then were granted this visa in April of 2012. Then, we’re here. We are scientists and I was granted a 2-year visa even though I had a 5-year contract or something like that. Everybody else got 5 years on their visa. So, same job title, same lab, same everything, except for the nationality, and I got 2 years on my visa, and the Americans got 5 years on their visa. [assessment levels] They told me that’s not what happened. That’s very good to know. That’s very interesting. Then 2-year visa. Then we had to renew. So, we renewed in May or April of 2014. Then, one year later, I moved to Data Science. And then I had to transfer the 457 across to my employer at the time. Then, a year later, probably a year later? Maybe a little bit less, we applied for PR as, what was the path, I can’t remember what it was called – something like direct entry on employer sponsorship and all that stuff. This must have been the direct entry stream or something. 187, maybe. Then we applied for 187 I think at Envizi. This was not the 2-year thing [being working for 2 years at an employer to be eligible for PR]. This was, I had to do the Vetassess. So, I did the skills assessment, and it was granted in 3 days and everyone was confused how it happened. Nobody knew why. Everything else was so difficult and Vetassess was just a matter of days. Oh no, I was thinking of another thing. But it was days. So, the lawyers were like, I guess you got lucky. So, the 457 renewal here was actually 2 days. So, let’s see, ah, this was also so much money bags because it went from like, $300 to $2000. This was out of pocket because this was for a government department. They were explicitly not allowed to pay for someone’s immigration expenses. They covered their side but then your visa expenses, they weren’t allowed to cover. When we came here the visa application was $300 and when we did the renewal, it had changed to $2000. I remember that clearly because $2000 to a Postdoc is an insane amount of money. Then, I got a job offer from here. So, we were waiting for our 6 months, for the PR, and I had to withdraw it because Atlassian said no, we’re not waiting for that. We’ll get you a new visa coz we don’t know how long its gonna take. It was already 6 months that we were waiting, so it might have been a matter of days. We were on a bridging visa but the 457 was still going at the time but I suppose it wasn’t transferable anymore. Yeah, so then, drop 187 application. When was that? I started here in October 16. So, this would’ve been let’s say September. So, we withdraw this application, and then October, new 457 visa. Then we get to November of 18 and we applied for PR for whatever the pathway is – the sponsored. So, that’s the present. We’re just waiting. We’ve been waiting for what – 8 months. 



M:	Decision of dropping the PR



H:	It was so hard, so hard. It felt so close and probably was. It probably was a matter of days. But yeah, the people here were completely rigid. They said no, we’re not waiting. It was at the time, it seemed like a very reasonable thing to do because the pay rise was more than considerable. In fact, the way things have turned out with the stock price, the pay rise was 100% - I’ve doubled my salary. So, it was a good decision. So, that was the consideration at the time – it was good money. But it was also about quality of work and all that. That hasn’t really changed. The work that I do here and the work that I did at Envizi – it was pretty much, you know, there are good days and there are bad days. There isn’t much difference in work for Data Science. So, that was the main driver at the time because I didn’t know how the financial side of it was go because, in terms of base pay, it was very small difference. But the stock price makes a huge difference. The main thing was also this place the work is going to be a whole other level. That hasn’t paid off, but the actual pay has paid off. 



M:	Tell me about your wife as well in terms of visa. 



H:	Has been on a dependent visa throughout which is an awesome visa – completely unrestricted visa. She’s been able to get her own job from day one without any restrictions. It’s a better visa than my visa. 





M: 	Commercial Services



H:	So, let’s see. Last time I made a little mental value of how much this has cost us over the years, it was about $20,000 that we had spent already on immigration. And this doesn’t count the money that the lawyers here are gonna charge – I think that’s gonna be like 5-6k as well for the lawyers here. And, I also haven’t tallied the cost of a bunch of translations and things I needed to do. So up until essentially, up until we changed to the commercial sector, we didn’t really use, essentially any services, we did everything ourselves because of course, Postdoc pay. Up until this point I don’t even think I had to translate anything. So, one side of it is that it was very favourable conditions in academia because essentially, the university vouches for you. Back then, the university was allowed to say, look this person has written academic papers, they can speak English, no language tests, Bye, and they were given that think. Whereas, I don’t think they can do that anymore. In the commercial sector they don’t. It was either when I transferred my visa or when I applied, ah yes, so when I applied for the 187, I had to get language tests, that was IELTS, which was basically a scam as far as I can tell. There’s just one provider, and they just make up a grade that doesn’t give you the top tier English. I’ve taken the test 3 times and I’ve had different grades each time. I’ve asked for remarks and they say, oh, I don’t know, this is your mark. IELTS also cost probably $2000 or something. I took the test 3 times and it expired I guess, and then I had to get a remark because they gave me a ridiculous mark and said my reading comprehension wasn’t good. And, there were mistakes in the questions. I was reading the test and there was a 2-part question and they said, basically, the structure of the question was assertion – based on this assertion tell me this. The assertion was incorrect. You read the question and the assertion is incorrect. They say “these researchers are performing investigations on these things”. No, other researcher in you article are doing this investigation. How do I answer this question? It’s gonna be wrong. It’s a scam. I have very strong opinions about this. I mean, I spoke to so many people while we were waiting. And it’s not only that. I mean, it’s a scam, there’s only one provider, obviously there’s politicians getting bribes here. Like, I come from a country where people tell you there’s a bribe. Here, they don’t tell you. But, it’s a bribe. There’s only one provider. But they were testing people – I was chatting to a guy from South Africa who obviously grew up speaking English. He was an Anglo-South African and he needed the test to do a PhD. To start a PhD program. Oh, don’t get me started on IELTS. Many emotions there. They’re also so rude. All the staff were horrifically rude. I mean, you can’t take a water bottle in there. You can’t go to the bathroom for 5 hours. I mean who do these people think they are? It feels as though, all the times I was randomly detained in the US, they put you in a little room with a small TV with Fox news playing, and there’s no remote, and it’s on high you try to just reach the off button. That’s the feeling I got in the IELTS room. It’s quite detention-y. You feel like a criminal. So, okay, up until, the whole academic time, no commercial services used. We do everything ourselves. When they transferred the 457 visa, here there’s a migration agent but the company paid for that. So, this is Envizi. Then, with the VETASSESS, again, there’s a migration agent, and then I and to pay for VETASSESS myself. I had to take the IELTS test, which also the agent didn’t realise I had to do until literally a week before the deadline which was stressful. Actually, at this point Physicist was on the list but the migration agent told me it wasn’t an option. So, I asked, can I do a self-sponsored thing? He said, normally you would but you don’t have a profession that doesn’t allow you to do that. That was incorrect completely. I mean, I would’ve had a PR years ago – 4 years ago and then, at the same time my actual profession at the time, which was an Analyst, I wasn’t actually, on paper, I wasn’t qualified as an Analyst for the points system. So, I couldn’t apply under some archaic title – operations analyst or something from the 80’s. That would be the profession but for that you need a degree in that, which doesn’t exist by the way. Or, you would need something like 2 years of practice in that field but at that time my whatever, 10 or 12 years of Physics didn’t count because I wasn’t an Analyst on paper. So, I was eligible for this direct entry, 187 thing, whatever it was. That was the only thing at the time. They made it impossible for me to apply as a skilled worker independently as an Analyst even when I had 2 years because they changed the rules. So, at that point, this is where the big money comes in. There’s also a lot of money for translations here. Not education – that was all in English. But, birth certificate, things like that. And of course, the agent is paid. Police checks, yeah, of course from each country. Thank God I didn’t need one from Chile, because technically I didn’t live there. I wasn’t there, I didn’t have a visa there. I was just visiting there for my research and I had a time limit – like, I wasn’t there for a year. But, my wife was, which is a bundle of joy now, a current blocker for our PR. They are asking for documents that they know cannot be obtained. Police checks from Chile. When my wife lived there – we actually met there – she was a diplomat, on a diplomatic visa. Scientists in the government agency where she was working there get a diplomatic visa, the car, and the house, the whole shabang. What that means is 2 things. There is no trace of you in police records. They don’t allow to have a trace because you’re a diplomat unless you’ve done some serious crimes, I guess. I don’t know what kind of treaties are in place for that. But, yeah, and then. But, when you leave the country, you have to relinquish your ID – your super-duper special ID that you can flash to people to get out of parking violations I guess, I don’t know why people use that. So on one hand you don’t have police records, on the other you almost didn’t exist there apart from your employers assertion that this person was a diplomat here. So, now they know – like, theyre asking for a photocopy of her ID card – the special ID card. They know that we can’t get that. I don’t know what’s gonna happen but this is the current stage that we’re in. We have a letter from her employer, signed, like, everything, with like the official seal. This is an international treaty organisation that’s putting a stamp on a piece of paper. That already was difficult to get. No, not enough. They wanted to get every bit of communication to prove that we’ve tried to do this. They wanted every bit of written communication between us and the people who tried to help us out in Chile with a statutory declaration and everything. Actually, they didn’t ask for that. Our lawyer said, do that and it will probably work, and they’ve been sitting with that for 3 months now. They’ve asked for it twice. You provided this but you didn’t provide this. I was like, umm, you didn’t read the thing we provided. That’s very reassuring. So, we’ve essentially the same documents twice because they asked for it twice. So, anyway, now all of these intermediate things are peppered with these delightful experiences of going to the lawyers. They’re very good – the lawyers that we use here – thankfully. Unlike the migration agent at the previous place. So, I’ve got to the lawyers several times with a stack of papers that have costed thousands of dollars to precure, dropping them on the desk, and they go, literally this morning everything changed, or literally, 3 days ago everything changed. So, I’m beginning to slowly slip into conspiratorial thinking because they know its gonna take about 6 months to get your documents. Even if you move at the fastest possible pace, that’s how long it takes to get a document from another country. So, they change everything every 6 months. At some point - I didn’t actually finish this project – I started writing an algorithm coz they do have to by law, post everything on their website right? So, I would parse through all those documents and see how much stuff changed and how frequently it changes. I should have finished that project. I never did. I got too frustrated with the whole process. So yeah, it changes basically frequently enough that you just have no chance of getting the document together. That’s our experience with PR here in the last one year.  So, what else have we paid for? Medical tests. Terrible health insurance. I had to go to the hospital a few months ago. I had a kidney stone, and I had to go to the hospital. This is the only one option that we have for health insurance with the 457 visa. They won’t even pay for the hospital. What do you think, I got kidney stones for fun? The most recent message is like, oh you should claim that on Medicare. You don’t understand what you do, do you? I’m sure they’re other things – oh notarizing documents also. Also, that’s more or less the things that cost money. Those processes had to be done multiple times. I’ve got like 5 FBI checks because it takes them so long to process things, I need to go get another one just in case. I’ve got probably 4 UK police checks. I’ve got like, a dozen AFP police checks. Thankfully, the FBI changed their system and you can do it online now. But it used to be, you had to go, get your fingerprints done, actually no, that’s still the case. The police officer has to take your fingerprints at the precinct, and they have to send the envelope out. So, they have to do all these logistics. So it could take anywhere between 6 and 9 months to actually issue the certificate. So in 4 months, we would reapply because we thought that by the time the case worker got to the case, we would go over the year and need a new one. So, go to the police station, get the police check done, then the FBI sends a piece of paper through Auspost that probably gets lost, and they say, oh your pinky is not visible. Send a new one. Like this, is 1890 or something. But thankfully they changed this in the last 6 months and the only complicated part is the finger printing. 



M:	Friends, family, greater community?



H:	So, I’ve never been surrounded by mostly Australians the whole time I’ve live here. The very few good scientists, or scientists that Australia produces go abroad mostly. The majority of Scientists that are trained here don’t work here. So, the import is how they make up for that shortfall. So, at the observatory, there was my boss and one colleague and that’s it. That’s all the Australian’s. Apart from that, everyone else, all the other postdocs, apart from that one guy, were from all over the place. Then when I moved to Envizi, I think there were only 2 Australians among 25 other people there. I mean, Australian born Australians. No, Actually, the 2 people Im thinking about came here as children. I don’t think anyone was born here in Australia. So, very international. So, technology sector, it was very international. Now, were beginning to produce the talent here, beginning. Here, is the same. We have junior developers who are Australians and some junior designers, I guess but mostly everybody is from abroad. All the analysts I work with, there’s quite a few people in the Analytics department, umm, were from all over the place. And then, somehow, even the things that we did as pastime hobbies, whatever, we were part of a couple of Karate, martial arts communities, and even those communities were all immigrants. The community on Deewhy where there were 3 Australian and everybody else were imports like us including the instructors. The people that started the community are from South Africa. We are actually really good friends. The one that we go to now, they are from Peru. So, somehow, not because we sought out immigrant communities, but the majority of people around us are immigrants. At most, they the children of immigrants. I don’t know that I know any Australians who are not the children of immigrants. Apart from a couple of people in – when you live on the North Shore – that’s the only place where weve met people who’s parents were born – in fact, No, nobody’s parents were born in Australia. I don’t know anybody who’s parents were born here. I don’t think I’ve met anybody. And I never tried for that to happen. I mean obviously we seek out things but not at work, not when you’re at a Karate class. This is gonna sound really mean and kind of, this is not gonna sound very good. But I don’t -  I can’t think of many fundamentally Australian activities that I wanna be a part of. Like, what am I gonna do? I don’t gamble, I don’t surf, I don’t drink heavily, like, what am I gonna do. Like, those are fundamentally Australian, Australian things. Like, I don’t do these things. So, the things that I do are – and I know how pretentious and snobbish this is gonna sound – but yea, all of the things that I do, their foundation, their roots are in, essentially, old world culture. Is this thing a painting? – Im interested. Does this thing involve music? – Im interested. But those are not things that originate here. Those are not the things that people do here. And I know how snobbish that sounds, and I don’t mean it to be this way. I’m not a snob about Australia. Australia is a great place. I’m just not interested in those things. It’s like golf. I know difficult. I know, it’s kind of amazing. I just don’t care. I don’t care if golf is difficult. I still don’t find it interesting or important. So, the past few experiences have been handled by lawyers, so I haven’t done much of that. The first time, my wife, the saint that she is, she took care of that. She was like, you know, you got the job, the paperwork – I’ll take care of that which is also a very nice thing. Also, I freak out about paperwork. She’s much better at that. So, yeah, so mili did that. The first time, it didn’t feel that daunting. The second time when we were renewing our visa at the observatory, I think it was significantly more complicated. I seem to remember that. And then the lawyers took care of it. So, all I had to do is fill out their form, and then they went and adapted that into the official form. Anytime I had to look up something for that, it was like reading Sanskrit. It was just, I had no idea what’s going on. So, I definitely relied on the lawyers. The thing is that I relied on migration agents too much and I thought that Im not gonna ask everybody how they did these things because im not gonna bother them because we have this expert. Ofcourse, when I brought things up with people because they would ask, hey how’s it going with PR, did you get it? So, after we applied for this 187, and spent all this money, I remember having a drink with this friend of mine and he asked a question and I was like you know, Physicist is not on the list and we had to do all this other stuff. He says what are you talking about. Physicist is absolutely on the list and he just goes on his phone and goes here it is – it’s on the list. I was just gonna jump of the roof coz it was so expensive and so complicated and it handcuffed me to my employer which I didnt like. I was very happy there at the time but I did not like the idea at all of being tied to an employer because – this is not what happened, everybody was really nice – but as soon as they know that you’re handcuffed there, they can do whatever they like, and what are you gonna do, leave? It is the same situation here but there was no other option for me. This is the only way we could apply for PR. There was absolutely no other choice. We were gonna apply again, this time last year, July last year is when I had all the requisites and points and all the requirements, and that’s when they took the operations analyst, the something something off the list. So, I didn’t qualify. Now they, I think they said, that they would bring in this tech worker category, but I don’t think they did that, and I would absolutely qualify under that if they were no bring it in. And also, actually, one other thing changed in the meantime. So my wife also changed from Astronomy around the same time as I did. Actually no, about a year later, and she wanted to do technical writing. They changed her profession and bumped it down to the short-term list. So, we couldn’t apply through her, and she’s an American citizen so we would’ve gotten much better treatment. But, she’s no longer eligible for PR because technical writer was bumped down to the 2-year list. 



M:	Technology



H:	Online searches have been more confusing than anything. Part of that is that there are all these migration agents who are fishing for clients and they will only give you half-truth. So, you’re looking for a yes or no answer to a very simple question and they say yes and no. So, you pay them some money for consultation on the phone. Oh, actually, this reminds me, we did use another migration agent at some point because I completely lost trust in migration agent in my previous company. So, we actually did pay a bunch of money to another migration agent to confirm what this person was doing because we lost trust completely. And this was through a network, our freiemds who are also immigrants told us this person, she knows everything. That was very good. We were seeking advice about a few things, very confidentially – we were asking if we apply through an employer and leave the day the PR happens, what’s the worst-case scenario? Do we get our PR taken away, do we get deported, what’s gonna happen? So, we were seeking an answer to that question. And again, nobody has the answer to that really. It seems to happen all the time, but the risk is high. So, that was back in the previous company. 



M:	Community services?



H:	I mean, it factors in some ways, in the community sense. So, you know, we go to Synagogue and people say, are you citizens yet, and they joke about it, and that made it a lot easier. Coz, its like, everything’s gonna be okay, don’t worry about it. So, it factors in that way. Its not something we sought out. Again, Synagogue is like 2 Australians. Number 2 is obviously facetious coz I keep saying it but again, there’s no Australians there. Its people from all over the world and I don’t know how that happened. 



M:	Next steps?



H:	Bridging visa – the underlying 457 goes to 2020 something, umm, yeah. That’s the visa we got through Atlassian so that’s the one with the maximum duration. People get PR within like a month here normally. We actually had to leave the country between the visas. We went to New Zealand for a month coz we thought, they said, it would take anywhere between 3-8 weeks. So, we were like, let’s just book a month. We got a call 2 days later. 2 business days later and they said oh your visa’s been granted. You can come back now. Is said but can I stay though. I think its just priority. I think Atlassian applications go on top of the pile. I don’t have a way to explain it. I know that they’re very good friends with the government, the CEO’s here. I’m sure that helps. 



M:	Have you provided any migration advice?



H:	Yes, Ive told my brothers. My brothers are both in the UK. One of them has a UK passport. The other one is in the process of getting one because they’ve both been there for so long. So, I was prodding them to do that because then they can come here on a work and holiday visa. So, my little brother is about to do that. Im sure he’ll come alomg for the adventure. Ive never felt qualified to provide advice. I’ve kind of pointed people toward and away from migration agents and that kind of thing. Someone came in and asked me, you wouldn’t know by any chance about this migration agents, and I was like yeah we’ve used them, they’re terrible, run away. 



M:	Migration elsewhere?



H:	We are thinking about it now. Again, obviously this is very very confidential. We are planning on NZ at some point. NZ is what we thought Australia is, I think, for a number of reasons. Plenty of disillusionment but that’s not really a reason. That would be a silly reason to move. Really, its just how expensive it is here. We don’t really, even though we are very, very well paid here. I’m pinching myself everyday with my Science background about this but its still not enough to buy a house, to have the kind of life we want. We’re not Australian, we don’t have family here. Its not like were gionna move to another city in Australia. That’s not meaningful to us. We could move to Adelaide but why move to Adelaide. That’s one extra flight to go home. Why would I do that? NZ, Wellington specifically is the right size of town for us. It’s the perfect compromise because I grew up in the country side so I would live in the woods if I could. Mili grew up in New York so it’s a litte different but shes getting tired of big cities too. So, small cities is kind of a perfect compromise. Its culture – one of the things that really – uhh – I cant – I, how, I mean we go to the Art Gallery in NSW every time we have a visitor and – this has happened like 2 or 3 times – I walk into the Art Gallery of NSW and I say to my visitor, I need to run to the bathroom but what you need to do is go down the stairs and to the right and at the far end of the gallery take another right, that’s the gallery you wanna go see coz theres one gallery basically, in Sydney and I know it like the back of my hand. I don’t like it. I wanna go to a gallery and see different things. That’s a very old world sort of view of the world should be about. It is not Australia’s view and I don’t begrudge it. Australia has many other things that are amazing but not for me. Theyre not amazing to me. They still don’t make up for the shortfall of traditional culture, the things I want. It’s a much friendlier place as well. Our decision was reinforced by a million times after the horrible thing that happened in Christchurch and the response that they had there. Ive never seen a people, a society react so well to something so bad. I mean, the US went on a wold wide killing spree after 9-11. These guys have the worst crime that’s ever been committed there and somehow everyones wants to move there after the response. We were actually there at the time after that happened, and we get there, and it’s a really grave atmosphere. But, people are going about their business. We were in Wellington, not in Christchurch. We were talking to everybody and everybody’s having conversations about it and saying you know, how oh you know, im gonna send a little book to the mosque tomorrow. We were in tears the whole time we were there because it was the most beautiful human reaction to something bad that had happened. It was extraordinary. That really reinforced this desire to move that. And it’s a place we can afford a house.  People in politics get in the way of things here all the time. Its not a progressive country which is fine. I don’t have to live in the most progressive place. That’s ok. But when it becomes, like, refugees are in concentration camps, and we refuse to put solar panels in our eternally sunny country because our friends in coal won’t make enough money – that’s pretty much the 2 most significant things in my world right now. You know, basically destroying the, like, it’s like a proper existential threat to humanity and this country is doing the exactly the opposite of what it should be doing, and I just dont wanna be here because of that. I know that leaving is not the answer. Staying here and having the opportunity to vote – in however many years they let me do that – would be a way to combat that. The climate change stuff, Im not gonna be waiting for 4 years to become a citizen to combat that. Im gonna go to a place where I can contribute to that sector, and they have a huge renewable sector in NZ. In fact, they run most of the renewables from Australia – wind farms, hydro, and solar – most of the actual commercial capacity is run by Australian companies. So, I could actually go an contribute there instead of being a drag here because every time I put the heater on, I’m screwing up the environment. Im not gonna freeze in the cold either. Yeah, its politics that is driving us away. It also, I felt this on a personal level whe I first got here – how can these people vote for One Nation? People we know, people in Karate, were like oh well not you, like all the other riff-rafs. It was infuriating. I just wanted to punch the wall, and I did sometimes. It was exasperating and I took that on a personal level. I don’t anymore. But now I see it as a big societal issue. This really is a thing. People don’t feel so strongly about there being horrific racists in their family. They’re like, whatever, Ah, uncle Tim’s a racist, some people are racists, ah, its fine. Or I’m not really a racist, I just want sensible immigrants to come here. Get out of here!



M:	Future plans?



H:	Because PR here gives us work rights in NZ. 4 years of presence in the country but yeah, we’ll seek citizenship in NZ. Here it’s a completely unknown – how long it would take. In principle its one year. In practice it won’t. Coz you have to have 12 months of presence in the country before you’re eligible to apply. Then it can be months. Sometimes they say ah yeah sure, and then it can be months or years until your citizenship ceremony, which is when you actually become a citizen. So, it could be 3 years. So, meh, I’ll wait an extra year and be in a place that I really like. That’s the plan.M:	When did you first move to Australia?



Cr:	Well I moved to Australia only 4 months ago. So I’m just… just arrived, newly arrived. 



M:	Motivations?



Cr:	Well, the main reason is that I met someone. We keep in touch during – more than a year. Me being in Argentina. Well, we decided to try how is it. So, of course we didn’t want to start straight away, like a marriage. So, we decided that maybe I can study something here, have the opportunity to experience this life here in Australia. So, that’s why – in my case I practised yoga for 15 years. I’m actually a Yoga teacher in Argentina. I came here just to improve my English and of course study a little bit more, certify my level of Yoga with an international recognized certification. I met him last here, not here in Melbourne – in Sydney. A long-distance relationship and it was like a job, building this relationship because every day…messages, skype… Fortunately, technology today is like, on your side, when this type of situations happens, you know. Fortunately, both of us, he and me, we have certain economical resources. So, for example he could go to… he went to Argentina last year, he stay with me for 2 months. So, he had the opportunity to meet my environment - My house, my car, my family, my friends, my everything. So, after that we decided to go on and well… to come here.



M:	Ethnic Background



Cr:	Argentine – its like multicultural.. multiracial? Well, we have a lot of races or ethnicities but mostly Spanish and Italians that came to this part of world after the 1st and 2nd world war. So, in my case, well, I have grandparents and great grandparents Italian and Spanish. I am Argentinian – my parents also. But, my parents and great grandparents, they come from Italy and Spain. I never in my life considered Australia like a possibility. Never. Because I don’t.. I prefer.. I love France. It is the truth. I am totally in love with France. I have been there like more than 10 times and I always visualise myself living in Europe, maybe France. I talk a little bit the language... not so good but, yes I have taken the examination and it’s a medium and average level of French. But well, the love appeared in my life and I never ever thought that he will be here in Australia and I decided last year to come here in Australia only once because I wanted to brush up my English a little bit after going so many years into France. So, I say well, I will come to Australia because there’s nice weather, we are in the same, parallel with Argentina so we share the same seasons, and I say well, the only time I will come here will be this – 2019 and well the love appeared in my life. I didn’t expect it. I visited Paris always, always like a tourist. But, it is not so… Like its strict here in Australia. I can get into Europe maybe sometimes twice a year. I used to go always under a tourist visa so I can stay in the country maybe 1 month. Next time, 1 month and a half. So, I can go, coming, go, get in, get out of the country.



M:	Planning?



Cr:	Well, at the beginning, when George, my partner he went to visit me in July I started to think seriously about moving here. So, I considered that I started my, to get prepared to come here maybe since April, no March, March last year when I started the IELTS examination because I wanted to improve my English.



M:	Options?



Cr:	Well my profession in Argentina is something that I can’t really use here. I’m a lawyer. I’m also a teacher at the University. Here, it’s like, being a lawyer is something that is only worth in your country. Here for instance, a country like Australia, maybe they belong to the commonwealth so its common-law and our system is totally different. Its more Romanic, you know. So, it’s like starting again. And of course, the cost to support your living here is too expensive and I can’t support my living and same for a university career. So, I decided to make professional something that I’ve been doing almost all my life which is Yoga. So, I said why not. Really, like it is something very nice to do. So, I decided to go there. It is shorter and of course, something that I could afford. 



M:	Family?



Cr:	No, I am in an age, where my family don’t take decisions on me anymore. I am 45 years old. It’s like, some people can consider it late. Some people may consider well, better later than never. So, I’m here. I just told them when the moment arrived, but they took it in a very good way. My sister, she doesn’t even live in Argentina. 



M:	Community?



Cr:	No, nothing, nothing, zero. So, I’m here from scratch. He’s the only person. In my case I enjoy being alone. I don’t have problems to enjoy by myself. But, for other people I know it can be a little bit challenging. 



M:	Visa?



Cr:	Here in Australia, I came under a student visa. Last year I came as a tourist. It took a long time. Long. Many times I was about to stop everything because I was sick and tired of all the paperwork, all the things. When I thought that I was finished, it wasn’t . New things and new roster came to me, so I again start a lot of money. I spent a lot of money because translating every document. My partner was very supportive. If it weren’t for him, really, I won’t be here because in the middle of the way I was like, I will quit it. Well, when I started to gather all the paperworks that the government ask from me, and I thought it was overwhelming. Overwhelming! All the paperwork, everything because in Argentina, for instance, bureaucracy is not efficient. So, to get one paper of one institution is an issue. So, for me it was exhausting. At the same time, I was working, and I have two jobs… of course everything I need to do to support my life and fortunately, the man I had in my life was very supportive. Sometimes he encouraged me to go on, don’t quit. That’s why I’m here. 



M:	Skilled migrant?



Cr:	I am, I am because I developed myself and my career in an environment that of course, how can I say, it’s like prepares you to be natural in certain things. I worked the last 12 years of my life, for instance, in criminal law. So, really, I have no problems and I have the strength to face a lot of situations and not lose my mind do that. But here, I don’t know if I can put that as a, if I can use all the knowledge, or all the experience. Sometimes, it is not about studying, or everybody can study, everybody just take a seat on the table and just wait, and you will learn. But when it is about inner self, inside you, when you know how to do things, or how to connect ideas, you know how to think and how to solve situations, that is what experience gives. Till the moment, I don’t know if I can use my experience here. 



M:	Mapping?



Cr:	Okay, I draw it? Migration agent – that’s the first thing. But first of that, IELTS. You have 2 versions – I went for the academic one. So, academic. My English was so behind that one year I tried to do my best. I have proved it with a grade of 6 which is enough to come here. But the IELTS is not only the cost of the examination, you have the fee but also private classes. Those private classes started in March, middle of March 2018. I can’t remember the exact date, but it was middle of March 2018. And I did that because I wanted to improve my communication skills. So, after that the immigration agent. He charged me the same fee to apply for the visa here. I can’t remember numbers, but I think it’s more or less between $600-700. So, he charged me that. Plus, I can’t remember exactly but it was about the same to apply visa. And then I had to attest documents. For instance, my degree, letters of recommendation from my 2 jobs, financial situation – I needed to prove that I have enough money to support my living here for 1 year, other things – I need to pay the fee so I paid $10,000 – that’s the cost of the year. I paid altogether, you know why – because I wanted to… just to get rid of it because the rest of the money, I know its just for me. I don’t have to worry. And, they asked me for statutory declaration from 3 people from my community from Argentina. For instance, I play tennis, so I asked one person, someone who plays tennis with me, someone who belongs to the same class… For instance, you go the police. Its like, that you declare under God that I know that person, he’s a very good person, he’s a part of the community. So, everything of that, translated. Yes, and what else. My certificate of birth also translated. Insurance. No medical test, only insurance. 



M:	Technology



Cr:	Google – the main place to research. Then, I tried to find a lot of YouTube videos from people. Argentina or South American coming to Australia but then I stop it. I stop it because some of them were a little depressing with bad perspectives. So, I decided to live my own experience. I tried to find information about institutions. For instance, where is the museum? What is the means of transportation here? How much is the cost of living? Here is very expensive. And Facebook, no not so much. 



Well, the Byron website or there is another one. Sometimes, you read, and you find one word that direct you to other kind of research and you find beautiful things. For instance, the information of Byron bay, where is Byron? Oh, it is in Gold Coast. Oh, Gold Coast is where? Oh, Brisbane. And you start a composition of… I went to Gold coast and to Brisbane. Gumtree, and also, I started to look around… just take a look, a glance at the jobs. So, I started with Indeed. The idea was to pick up the language that you need to describe yourself, or describe your role. 



M:	How did you decide on the institute for your course?



Cr:	Because I read the website completely and it is beautiful what they do because they are very focused, and they compromise with the people since the beginning. Not only to the students who train to become Yoga teachers but also to your students. Safety, it is something very important for this institution. They convinced me and you know, I think I am correct with the decision I made. Skype, yes. Ah, the main one is WhatsApp for long distance relationship with partner. 



M:	Government required?



Cr:	The list of things, requirements that they have is very very long. Now, they went out of my mind but one of them, one of them, I needed to wrote a letter to the government explaining why I wanted to come here. I found that a little bit, maybe, rude because it’s like, too much things to give just to prove that you only want to live here for one year. Maybe because in Argentina we are more welcoming with people and if Aussie…Australian people want to go, we won’t make it hard for them. So, here I need to prove that I have $30000. It was very hard to gather all this money, but I did it. I had to prove a lot of things. They wanted me to prove that I had things in Argentina just to bring me back after the visa, you know and I did it because I have a lot of things to go back to in Argentina. I have my family, my friends. Here I am alone and the only person I have is my partner. But, I bet for this. It’s a bet. And I only need one year for this. In one year we can make the decision – if we get married or if it is over. But, it’s like the government is pushing you, you lie, not lie but you look at different options. For instance, paying a course here just to get a student visa and on the other side I don’t want to get married straight away. I needed the space and the time to live together and see how it goes with each other. I don’t want to run into marriage. 



M:	I asked her about the prospective marriage visa 



Cr:	Well, yes, we talked about that once but what happened –they push you to get married in certain time. You have 9 months. I don’t want to. I don’t want to. I have lot of things to think about. I have my properties. I have things in Argentina. He has things here. My partner, he has 2 kids. Of course, he needs to think about the kids, and I want to think well if I die. Maybe I am too much realistic. It’s like, there are too much things to think about. Just because getting a title of residence here, just get married. I don’t want to do that. But, I want to love here and I want to enjoy this relationship without the pressure of all of this. 





M:	Challenge



Cr:	Well, yes – upgrade English to speak and write as an equal. Now I am one second, maybe 2 back. What else – find a job. You know one man told me… I never mentioned that I am a lawyer because here it is nothing. In my life I’m not so pretentious with things. So, I never mentioned. I am a little bit like a slow to speak. So, this man, he wanted me to be like a superstar. He wanted to pay nothing because we are talking about, in black, cash, no taxes and he only gave me $15. I only did one trial and he wanted me to become like a superstar and he treat me really bad. Like I mentioned you before, like, misguiding me. He proposed me 2 things. I think he wanted to take advantage me because he proposed me after that if I wanted to go and get some experience with him and work for nothing, not being paid, I can go to his shop. So, work and not be paid. This is one option. And the second option he gave to me was well I have another… he had another company for cleaners and that’s something I don’t want to do. I don’t clean my house. I don’t want to go and clean someone else’s house. Really! I want something I appreciate, and I respect a lot people who do that. Of course, I respect them. In my case, what do I want for me… I want something a little bit more qualified. Slowly, slowly start to get something more qualified. Not like this. Maybe they have an idea that if you are South American or something like that, its like, you need to come here and go to clean. Hey! No. And at the same time he offered me to work for nothing. It is life. It is not fair. And if you get angry, you will lose. You say okay, thank you, I will think about it. Bye-bye. I finish with one list if things. I gathered all the documentation. It was like a mountain – mountain of things. And I say I can relax and I started to feel in my body that sensation of relax. Another list came to my email with new things. You know, really, I forgot about them. But for instance, let’s say, the statutory declaration from my community. That’s something new so I need to look for friends, waiting for them to be available, go to the police. It was really, really hard for me and everything then translated. Well, one moment was that. Everything translated in English. Well it is, I have to say, there is a logic. Its logical but I have no more money because I need to keep my living in my country. I save money because the government of Australia wanted me to prove that I have to support my living here and also paying all of that. I said I can’t, I can’t. My partner, he helped me. He helped me paying the translation. So, I paid for instance to translate my degree and he paid me to translate the rest of the documents. But it was, we are talking about a $1000+ more or less. 



M:	Community service



Cr:	Well, where I used to work it is a community service. I worked for the government, it is for justice, in fact. In Argentina, third world country, everything connected with criminal law, it means that you work for poor people. Well, it’s such a way that I sometimes felt like my job was a mix of criminal lawyer, social assistance, psychologist. It was really like working for the community. I also did other things. Not now but when I was younger, I used to go to community dining room – a place where they feed poor people in Argentina. I did that job.  You help with the kids, with their homework, you feed them. And here, I’m starting in Oz harvest. It is that anything connected with food and nutrition is very interesting for me. I went to Oz harvest. It is beautiful. That’s what I am doing now. 



M:	Future options



Cr:	I’m not sure of I like Australia. Interesting right? I think I don’t like Australia. There is something very interesting because everybody talk with such love about Australia that really now, I am intrigued. What is it about it? Why? And its 4 months I am living here, and I came here last year too. Really, I don’t find this something amazing. I like other kind of cities. For instance, Paris. Paris is like a museum on the street. You only need to walk, and you are in the middle of a museum. People have such good manners. Here? no!. People in France they have good manners when they eat. They are delicate. They are like stylish. Here it’s like, everything is like, gross. I’m being a horrible person if I say that. Sorry but well, it’s that. But, I really like very much this person that I found. I came here because of him. I’m just giving an opportunity to this country to fall in love with this country too. I want to. But, sometimes you want but you don’t decide. I’m trying to. He cant move. First thing because he can’t speak Spanish and he’s not willing to learn Spanish. I speak English. Maybe I’m not a C1, C2, but my English is perfect to help me to build our relationship – its enough. He has 2 kids. One of his kids, he’s disabled  - yes neurological, physiological, physical. It’s a boy. He’s only 7 years old and doctors say his expectation of life is not too long, you know. The other girl – the girl is good. No problem with her. They don’t live with us but every fortnight they come. Next week, for instance, it’s the girls birthday so we are going to celebrate. Well, instead of that I decided to come here. It’s a challenge. So, I would really like to understand why people are so in love with this country. I’m only in love with him. Well, something that I started to realise about Australia, and I love is for instance, so efficient, with the financial system. I went to the commonwealth bank and it was so easy to open an account. It was 10 minutes. I couldn’t believe it. In Argentina everything is a problem. That’s something that I really like. Now I manage all my money and all my payments through the application and it is amazing. It is easy. I’m so relaxed with that. I try to discover things in the landscape. For example, I went to this exhibition about the revolutionaries in the Melbourne museum. It was amazing and I pushed my partner to come with me because it’s like, maybe I’m wrong, but I think that sometimes maybe Australian people are not interested in culture or maybe, learning new things. They only want to wake up, go to work, come back, eat, go back to work. The routine is too strict. But, in the middle of all this there is culture. Culture is so important because it get people together. 



M:	Final thoughts?



Cr:	This is very important for me. Look, I had a job. I had 2 jobs. One of them was a job for life. You know what I mean. I had that position and the only thing I could do in that position is growing. I quit it. It was very big decision and a very hard decision. I only could improve myself with that role. I kept my job at the university. I have a license there. So, it is 2 years. It is a university for Engineers. So, the subject that I am running there, it is like a cultural subject for future Engineers. So, for instance I have courses in civil Engineering, Mechanical and so on, like something general and they considered me for license. So university - I love it. But the other one, they said no, if you leave, you quit. That was something very hard I need to do. Like, I told you before, to bet for this person, really, look, it’s amazing how things work. I didn’t expect and really, I like him. Yes, I love him. But loving someone is not enough but also how you work together. You can love a charming prince but then the charming prince is like an idiot so you can’t keep that image. But here it’s a person that I love and I like. So, I did a lot of hard things just to give this relationship an opportunity. So, quit very important and stable job in Argentina related with my profession. The only perspective in this job was like, growing. And here, look, I have no problems. If I need to go to work in a coffee shop, I have no problems with that. I don’t like cleaning. I don’t like that. But making coffee, maybe working in a shop – I have no problem with that. Of course, its not something recognized, and qualified like I have in Argentina but its okay.M:	When did you first migrate to Australia?



L:	I arrived on the 28th of February, this year, in Sydney, and we were here for a week before I started. I started the following week – my job here.



M:	So this is your first time here?



L:	I came to Australia first in 2001, on a working holiday visa, a backpacking visa, and absolutely loved it. I had some family in Brisbane. So, it was almost like a rite of passage for my cousins – we all came here, and absolutely loved it, and always wanted to come back. And then, kind of, life gets in the way. I got married, I got 3 kids, and had work and it just so happened, I had a really bad day at work and saw a job advertised here. I though oh, that’s quite exciting. Shall I apply, and my husband said, oh just apply. What have you got to lose – not thinking I would actually get the post. But, I got it and ended up coming back here. He’d also done backpacking here – he’d been over on a year visa. Not at the same time as be, but yeah. So, he knew what he was coming into as well. So, I flew into Sydney when I arrived the first time and didn’t like it. It felt like, it was a city that could’ve been anywhere in the world. It didn’t really feel like Australia to me at that time, and I had two weeks here, then before I went on travelling around in Australia. But then, when I came back home, I had another 2 weeks in Sydney, and I actually loved it. It was just that I had been around, and kind of knew what to expect. I don’t know what my expectations were when I first arrived. But, I don’t know what I was expecting actually. The city didn’t provide that the first time. But when I came back, it did. 



M:	What was it?



L:	I think it just didn’t have an identity. I don’t think – I just felt like I could’ve been in London, I could’ve been in Paris or Amsterdam, and it was just a city. But I guess, it was my first time travelling, first time away from home, didn’t really know anybody, didn’t know what I was supposed to be doing. So, I went backpacking by myself. So it was me in a new city, and.. but I think by the time I came back around, I had a better idea of Australia. I had a better idea of myself I think. I had to go back and finish my undergraduate. So, I was only here for a year. In fact, it just just short of a year and I knew I had to go back and finish my degree. So, wasn’t an option to stay, and at that time it was only a 1-year visa. They didn’t have this 2-year option that they have now, and it was that whole thing to having to have money in the bank to show that you have funds to travel – so I think, I had to have, like a 1000 pounds in the bank before I could get my visa to come back, and then I didn’t have any as a student. I didn’t have any money. So, my mum and dad put money in my account so I could show them, to get my visa. It was a good experience.



M:	Planning?



L:	So, we – So, I’ve always talked about coming back, and coming over with the kids, and in 2012, 2011 actually – we came across for a month. We went to Perth in Western Australia, for a month over Christmas for a holiday. That’s was when I thought, okay we have a bit of money – lets have a good holiday. And, at the back of my mind, I was like, lets have a holiday, lets just see if we could do this. Could we stay here. We had a great month, and then we came home and my father-in-law died. So, my mother-in-law was by herself, and my husband said, theres no way we can even think about going away, now that shes by herself. So, that kind of went on the backburner. I think it had always been at the back of my mind. My husband was sort of forced into it this time – coerced into it. I think there was always a plan, not sure if I’d actually realise it though. Didn’t think it would actually happen. Coz as my kids get bigger, there’s the thing about school, and so there was a kind of plan, that I didn’t know for sure was gonna happen…if that makes sense? So, my kids are 14, 12, and 9 – 2 in high school and one in primary. So, when we had come over for a holiday, my kids loved it – absolutely had a ball. So, I’d kind of been working on that – last couple of years, like, oh – how good would it be to live in Australia, and they are really outdoorsy. So they all surfed in Scotland. So, they all could imagine surfing in Australia. So, they definitely helped pave the way – I think they were definitely open to the thought of moving elsewhere. My husband was working. He’s a carpenter to trade but he was working in the offshore oil industry. So, he was working away for 3 weeks, home for 3 weeks, and he hated it – absolutely hated it. So, he was looking for an excuse to leave there. So, I think, I used that to my advantage as well. I think that timing worked really well with this post coming up. We had been feeling really unsettled, and maybe a change would be good. And, then my mother in law is now, has a new partner, and she lives half the year in Canada as well. Edmonton, no – my brothers in Edmonton. Shes in London, Ontario. So, that was kinda not an issue anymore either. So, it all kind of feel in place. And also my sons 14 – so it was almost like now or never because he was gonna enter exams at school. So, if we didn’t go kinda soon, then we wouldn’t get to go..



M:	Professional background?



L:	Okay – Im a senior lecturer in design and innovation here. So, Im 40:40:20 contract here so, 2 days research, 2 days teaching, and a day of service. So, I’ve been doing that for the past 4 years. I’ve been in a teching research role with Glasgow school of Art in Scotland. But I’ve kind of.. this is.. kind of … different patchwork of things I would say. So, my undergraduate was in Design, and you cant do very much with a design degree, not at that time anyway. So, I left my undergraduate and went to work as a curator on an Island – so I moved to an Island – a tiny, remote Scottish Island, at the age when all the people, as 21 are leaving the island. So, it was really, a good experience but it was really hard t break into the community coz everybody goes, you know. They grow up on an island and cant wait to leave, and I was joining it. I was there for a couple of years. And then I moved back home and worked in the local government for about 4 or 5 years, in policy. So, I did policy development. And at that time I went back and did my Masters in Policy development and management. It was quite interesting how policy was written, and then got frustrated with local government, and also I had my kids at the same time. So, went free-lance and did some project management for Arts and Cultural projects, and I did that for about 10 years, and then saw a PhD position. It was in cultural policy, and I thought that’s really quite interesting. I’m kind of a really curious person and cant imagine not learning. So, I applied for this PhD position – never got it. So, I was gutted. Then they phoned me a couple of weeks later and said that we’ve got this other PhD, not in cultural policy, but in design innovation – you might be interested? So, I jumped on it. So, I did my PhD as part of a larger design project that involved 5 Art schools, it was a national project and my PhD – So, I was funded for 3 years, and my PhD fund had run out after the 3rd year and I wasn’t finished. So, I had to work full time from there. So, my PhD took 6 years. But I finished, and then for the past 4 years I’ve been working on this digital health project. 



M:	When you were considering Australia, were there other countries in mind?



L:	No – I would never even consider anywhere else. Although, now that I’m here, I’m a bit more open to considering other countries. I don’t think I could ever have imaged – there wasn’t a big enough reason for us to go anywhere else. But now that I’m here and I can see how easily my kids have settled, I’ve become more open to that. I mean, we could go anywhere. I’m not sure my husband feels the same way. But, I feel that we could go, you know, I’m much more open to moving places now that I’ve moved once. 



M:	Was it always going to be Sydney?



L:	I wasn’t fussed about where in Australia. It could’ve been anywhere. Although, the lure of Sydney was the post. So, I’ve come from a small specialist Institute, and the focus there was just design. And, my research is a bit trans-disciplinary design – so across faculties, across institutes. So, the offer of the university here was that of course, it’s a huge university, and there’s lots of faculties. So, lots of opportunities for cross-over. 



M:	Planning the move



L:	It all happened very quickly. So, I applied for the post in October, and I had a skype interview in, at the end of November. I actually applied for a different post. I never got the different post. So, I had a second interview and they said, no I didn’t get the post, but they have this other post – if you’re interested. I said I might be interested in that. So that was the end of November and they said, well can you come out and look at the campus, come visit us and see if you like it. So, they flew me out in the second week of December to have a look around. So, I spent a week meeting everybody, deciding if it was or wasn’t what I was going to do. That was 8th of December. So, they had offered me the post, given me the contract. I had to accept it by, I think, the 18th of December before everybody broke off for Christmas, so that they can start the visa process. So, that was the 18th or 20th of December. I said yes, okay we’ll definitely take the post, we’ll make the move, subject to the visa of course. The visa came through, so yes – that was Christmas time, the school closed, and I was still getting emails from HR requesting all the information. They sent me a long list of everything they needed. I needed to get the police checks, I needed to have all the birth certificates, all the addresses where you’ve stayed, copies of my qualification, and all that kind of paperwork, and all the kids birth certificates and all because they were gonna sponsor us all to come over – and before Christmas. And, they did their part of the visa application, and I got an email on the 3rd of January from the immigration office just asking me to submit my part of the visa application, and the money – pay my part of it, and the visa came through in a week. So, it was crazy fast. By the time we came back to work after Christmas in January, the 15th of January, we were getting ready to go. Although I hadn’t handed in my notice at that point because I couldn’t hand in my notice if I didn’t know my visa was gonna come through. So I went back to my old job in January and handed in my notice and asked them how long do you want me to work for. I’m meant to have 3 months of a leave time before I hand in my notice, and they said okay fine, if you can finish your teaching then you can go whenever. So, I handed in my notice with a finish date of 23rd of February – was gonna be my last day at work, which was a Friday and then we flew out on Saturday. Must be the 24th. So I only had, really, that kind of 6 weeks from Christmas to when we actually left to fly and everything, sell our house, everything. We only came out suitcases – sold everything. We’ve stolen a room at my parents house for things I couldn’t sell at that time, and things that I wasn’t sure that I want to get rid of you know, that type of thing. But it was quite cathartic – just stuff you accumulate over 20 odd years. 



M:	Organizing stuff here?



L:	That was crazy. So, when I came over in December for my visit, I kinda had a couple of days where I thought I’m gonna go have a look at what’s available apartment wise or house wise. I did 2 or 3 viewings and I almost cried. None of the houses were good – they were just awful. The problem was that we left a beautiful house in Scotland. We’d renovated it, and a huge huge house, and I know I wasn’t gonna get something like that here. It’s a city. We came from a rural, coastal village. So, I started to panic. And the university sent me, as part of my welcome pack, and it had, I got some relocation expenses for moving us over for our flights and towards our visa, and also they offered to reimburse an agent, or some kind of help with finding a house. The limit was $10,000 – 10000 or 5000 – It was $15,000 altogether and we could choose to spend that however – like using a relocation agent or a housing agent, or however we wanna use that relocation money. But actually our flights were about $12,000 alone. So, I couldn’t spend on a relocation expert. So, we just had to kind of do it ourselves online which was crazy. Because its so expensive and particularly coming from the UK, where the wages are not nearly the same as what they are here. So, having to find the money that we can put down for a month’s accommodation, and visa cost, and – coz I knew I would have to wait for 2 months to claim it back from the university. So I begged, borrowed and stole from parents and – until we had enough to pay for our first months accommodation. So we ended up booking an Airbnb for the first month in Lilyfield – its towards Rozelle. So, we got an Airbnb there for the first month and it was nice, it was a house, 3 bedrooms, so the little ones were together and my son had a room to himself, and it was close enough to university for me to commute – it was 20 minutes by bus. So, it was actually perfect. It did the job, and then in that time we had to find something permanent. It was really difficult. We – and I think more difficult for my husband coz he had done all the renovation so he didn’t want to live anywhere that wasn’t as good as what we had. So, really not a lot available. We looked eveuywhere. We looked at apartments, and we looked at houses. We looked all over Sydney. And the problem was I didn’t know what suburb we wanted to be based in. I forget what its called but theres a site online where you can check the suburbs and theyre given ratings. Its not Domain – I know that site the back of my hand, Ive been on it, you know, constant. Theres another site – I cant remember if its know your suburb or… you can type in, like you can search all the Australian suburbs and its gonn agive you ratings for family friendly, or convenience, or distance from the city. And we ended up scouting that and finding out which suburbs might fit, and in the end we – that last week of our Airbnb, we still hadn’t found anything. So everyday – and I was working at that time – so it was up to my husband and the kids to go look. So everyday, my husband was looking. Every evening, we were just going to viewing after viewing after viewing. And we wanted to be in the Northern beaches. We wanted to be next to the water, and on the last Wednesday before we were due to leave the Airbnb, we said right – we can’t find anything in the Northern beaches, where else can we go. And somebody here said, well have you looked down in Sutherland shire, coz you know the beaches down there. So, we said okay lets go down and see all the open viewings that day and so we went down to Cronulla, and Caringbah, and we saw one house that was perfect. It was a brand new built, 5 bedrooms – so enough bedrooms for everybody, had a swimming pool, and it was the same price as what we were looking for apartments in the city. So, I was just like, this is just amazing. We took it on the spot. So we took it for a 2 year lease. So, there’s another – as part of our searching, I had set a radius from the university of an hour’s public transport, just basically drew a circle. I just wanted it to be an hour maximum. So, I am pretty much just an hour door to door. 40-minute train ride and 10 minutes walk each side. 



M:	Family



L:	I think my parents are finding it quite difficult – particularly difficult because I’m the eldest of 4 and we’re all in 4 different continents. So, my brother is in Canada, my sisters in West Africa, Im in Australia, and just one brother at home with my parents. My mum and dad – I was the first one to have kids, so they’re really close to my children. When I was doing my PhD, I had to travel 2 hours to university. So, my mum used to come down at 5 in the morning to let me go for the 6 o’clock train, and she would leave the kids to school, then go to her work and come to mine after work, and give them their tea, and put them to bed, and get home at like 10 o’clock at night. So, she had a lot to do with my kids. They find it really difficult. But, they’re also supportive. They’re happy to – and I had told them that I had applied this job in Australia. They were just like – oh what has she got on her head this time. And then when I got it, my mum was excited, but my dad was very quiet. My dad is never quiet. But it’s been fine. They’re coming out in October so that’s really good. It was also difficult.. so, I come from a huge, massive family. My dad’s one of 11 children, and my great granny is still alive. She’s 97. So, 11 kids and then there’s 38 grand-children that are my generation, and 36 great grandchildren – the generation before, and we’re all over the world. Theres some in Australia, some in Singapore, some in America and Canada. So, she was really happy for us. She was really really just so excited. My other grandmum, so my mums mum – Shes gonna be 90 this year. She’s had a lot to do with my kids as well. So they used to go to hers for tea couple of nights a week, and going to see her after school. But she found it really difficult when we told her. I think that I find that the most difficult part. My mum and dad are fine – they’re busy, they’re working, they’ve got a social life. But my granny – she doesn’t leave the house. So us going, I think she’s really going to miss the kids, and my son particularly, hes 14, and he you know, did a lot of baking with her, and you know, had a really close relationship. So, that was hard telling her. But everybody else, I think, was quite happy. It’s a close knit community there – so I think its about 700 houses. 2000 people. So everybody knows everybody, and I have a really close group of about 10 girlfriends, and all the kids are the same age, and it was hard telling them coz all the kids have grown up together, we’ve grown up together in a way I guess. But everybody was really positive. There was a few comments of you know, why are you going to the other side of the world? Why! Why!. Laughs. 



M:	Friends or community here?



L:	I have a cousin who is sometimes based in Sydney. He works for an IT company. He manages their Australasian side. So he’s right across Asia and New Zealand and sometimes hes based here. So, I asked him for advice. But he’s a bit older than me, not married, and doesn’t have kids. So, he has a kind of, different perspective of Sydney than – So he was helpful because he provided an address that I could send my bank cards and things to, coz I was worried about things going to the Airbnb, and we’d already moved on. So, he could provide a permanent address that I could send important documents to. Apart from that, not really. I kinda just had to scour the internet for advice and all that. Some of the people I met here were really helpful. I got some emails as I was preparing, saying, you know, if there’s any questions, just let me know. Particularly, once they found out I had kids. Lots of people suggested things about school’s coz that was another problem right – where do we go to school. What’s a good school, do we move to a particular area to find a good school? They’re quire strict with the zoning, and the school systems are quite different. You’ve got your private schools, and you’ve got your selective schools, which weren’t open to us on our visa, so it was gonna be public schools. On our visa, my kids can’t get entry to selective school. We could pay for private school, or the public system. With 3 kids I can’t afford to pay for private schools, and my husband isn’t working yet. So, I’m the only one earning – so there’s no way. But, actually, we visited a couple of schools in the area – around the house, and we basically just ended up picking one. 



M:	Skilled visa



L:	It is interesting. So when we were first coming out around, 2012, my husband would be the nominated skilled person that time coz I was in the middle of my PhD, and hes a carpenter. So, he would’ve had to do a skills test, and he refused to do a skills test. He said, I’ve been a carpenter for 20 odd years. Why would I need to go and show someone I can hammer a nail to prove myself – and he had to pay for that test as well. He was like, Im not gonna do that. So, that was a little block for us then. This time around, it was interesting because it isn’t called a skilled visa but they didn’t – apart from my qualifications, and a letter from my employer to say that I’ve been working in this capacity – that was the measure of the skill. It was interesting coz I, you know, my former employer, I got on really really well with him. So, they did really give me a good letter of reference. But I didn’t demonstrate my skills. You know, I just provided someone’s opinion of my skills. So, it was interesting for me to see how they imagine what skills are. How they articulate skills, particularly, in this context – you know in teaching, or design. They didn’t talk to any of my former students to find out if I was as skilled as I had mentioned. So, it was interested. I had to provide that letter from, as well as my reference, a letter from my employer to say that yes – I’d been working in the capacity of a senior lecturer position. I had over an x amount of time and had managed to demonstrate the skills required to perform that role. But they gave me a template for that letter for my employer to fill in. I think that was the university. So, it wasn’t even something that I had to write from scratch. Just had to fill in my name, job title, and the length of time. I guess the university knows what they’re looking for. They do this stuff all the time. But in terms of permanence, yeah I do really want to be here. We don’t want to go home. My daughter, the middle daughter – she’s 12, she’s been hearing that we’ve got a 4-year visa. She says, you know in 4 years I’m gonna be 16, im gonna be an adult, I can stay back by myself. So, if you go home to Scotland, you’ll be leaving me behind. Laughs. But yeah, I would like to see us translate that into a permanent visa. We think after the 3rd year, the university can sponsor me for PR. I did ask that in my interview, if I could go straight on to PR as opposed to TSS, and they said no. That would’ve been easier for me. I guess the added incentive was that the university was gonna pay for the relocation. 



M:	Mapping



L:	So, I think. So, the visa category was a working holiday visa, It was 2001. I don’t remember what the number was and I think that I. I came out in September, no I came out in May. So, I definitely know that I flew home on the day of the Sept 11th. So, I woke up and saw the twin towers fall, and thought to myself that I had to fly on a plane all the way to Scotland. I had 3 flights to get that day, and I remember, I woke up – and I was at my aunties in Brisbane coz she was gonna drive me to the airport to get my flight to Sydney. And I remember, just waking up, having breakfast and we’d put on the news, and just watching it happen, thinking, oh my goodness. I was phoning my mum and saying I can’t possibly be flying today, what am I gonna do. But actually, it was fine. It was a really interesting flight. Everybody was kinda shell shocked and there was no luggage, like, some planes were not running. I remember I had to wait for hours in London for a final connection. So, yeah it must’ve been 2000, and 2001 when I came home. Yeah, crazy. You just never forget.  So I didn’t plan to come to Australia on that working holiday visa actually. It was between my 2nd and 3rd year at college. I wanted to go to Japan. My cousin was working in Japan at the time, and I was studying textile design, and I remember saying to one of my teachers oh my cousin’s in japan. I’d really like to go and get some textile-based experience in Japan, take the summer break. We have an extended summer break in Scotland – so it’s like May to September. She said to me I think you don’t have enough knowledge or expertise yet to do any kind of work in that field, and I was gutted. So, I never went to Japan and that’s when I thought I’m gonna actually take some time off and go to Australia. So, WHV – I don’t remember how long it took but I don’t think it took long. I just remember you had to have a 1000 pounds in your bank on a statement to show for the. So that was 2001. Okay, so then we came back in Christmas 2011-2012. We came out for 4 weeks, just a tourist visa. We went to WA. So, we went up and down the coast of Western Australia. So yeah, and then I saw the job advert, and then I was invited out. So, when I came out, when I was invited out, they said, it was in the end of November, they said, well can you come out in the next 2 weeks, which was great – it fit in my schedule but I had applied online for a visa to come out, and it hadn’t come through. They booked my flights, they paid for all my flights to come out and had applied online – it was just a tourist visa, online on the government website, and it wasn’t coming, and it wasn’t coming, and it said it will just take 40 hours to 5 days, and the clock was ticking, the clock was ticking. The day before I flew, I phoned Australia to the government thing to say, I got up in the middle of the night to phone them and say, Im meant to be coming out, I’ve paid for my flights, I don’t have the visa yet, and he said yeah theres a backlog, theres nothing we can do, you shouldn’t have booked your flights until you had your visa, and I was like Oh God, whats happening, and I happened to have mentioned it to someone else. So, nobody knew I was coming out this week. I hadn’t told any of my friends or family because I wasn’t gonna say that Im going for a job interview in case I never got it. But I had told my mum and she had spoken to somebody at work who said she can get a tourist visa from the estate agent, no travel agent. So, you can get a tourist visa, you can pay 20 pounds at the travel agent in the UK anyway. Not sure about anywhere else and I’m not sure about what it’s called. So, the morning of the day that I flew, I went to the travel agent at 9 o clock, asked them to open the door and they gave me a visa for 20 pounds in about 20 minutes. And that overrides the visa. So about 3 days into my stay here, I got an email from the government site here to say that your visa application has been cancelled. I’m thinking, what’s wrong and then I realised that it was the one that I had done online. So, you can’t get visa on arrival for Australia for me, on a UK passport. They wouldn’t let me on a flight if I didn’t have a visa. So, that was my problem. My flight was gonna take 36 hours. So, I had asked what if my government one comes through by the time I arrive? Would that be okay? And he said, well you’re not allowed to leave Scotland unless you’ve got a visa in place. And it is exactly the same visa that the government would give you but it is a different name. Its just a tourist visa. They just click a few buttons and they give you this and it lasts for 3 months, which I think is the same as the government one. But its not in the government system. Although, it must actually go through the govt system because the govt system emailed me to say we realise you’re already in Australia so we’re gonna cancel this application. So, that was a bit of stress because the morning I was flying, I was like I don’t have a visa to get in. So, I arrived, then went home again, took the job, and then the visa’s came in 6th of January 19, and we booked our flights for 25th of Feb. I was scared to book the flights until the visas weren’t there. So it wasn’t the job I applied for but I knew as soon as I came for the visit that I was gonna do the job. Absolutely. And I said that to them. Although afterwards, the dean of the school, the boss, said I didn’t think youd actually were gonna do the job. I was like really! Why!. She was like, I knew you were adventurous, but I just thought it would be too big a move for the entire family. I said well.. I always found it interesting that people interview for jobs and have no intention of taking the job. I was always gonna take the job if I was interviewing for the job, if I got offered it. 



M:	Commercial services



L:	Okay so for visa prep, we had to have. So, that was a bit of a pest because they asked for all of this information over the Christmas break where everybody is shut, and everything’s closed. But we had to get two police checks. So my husband had to go get that. We had to pay for that. It was like $160 each. We had to have pay slips – 3 X payslips from both of us plus the annual tax review. We had to have the whole family’s birth certificates. I couldn’t find mine either. I found the abbreviated version but not my full one, and our marriage certificate. It was quite confusing because the university have an HR relocations person and I was issued with a contact person, and she was like my constant throughout. So, she provided me with all the information, kind of step-by-step, screen-shots of what you need to do, and usually its quite straight forward but some of the questions were, So she said – they recommended use a visa agent to do your visa application. I didn’t. They gave me list. So, they provided a list of people and companies who could do it for your visa, for schools, for accommodation. So, they provided that. I decided not to use an agent for the visa because I thought it was gonna be easy, and it was generally easy. The question that tricked me was the IELTS because I’m a national English speaker. Do I have to do IELTS? And I had to come back and ask that and she said no no, the university ticks that all for you. So, everything else was pretty straight forward. So, it’s a 2-part visa because its sponsored. So, the university had to submit all their paperwork to say that this this the post, and this is a post we can’t fill with anyone locally, the labour market testing, and then once they had their approved, they send it on to me to submit all my paperwork and the fee, and I think the fees, altogether was like $7000 for the family. The kids were quite cheap. That’s when you think we really should’ve used an agent because if that’s wrong then they can say were gonna keep that money. But luckily, it was all right. We didn’t need any medical checks. So, that surprised me because I had to have a medical check for my temporary working holiday visa. I was very surprised. What my visa does require is that I have private health insurance and I don’t know whether they think that if you have private medical insurance then you’re not gonna be a burden because you’re gonna pay for yourself but I had to tick … there were a few checkboxes that I had to tick to say that I was in good health. I’m not a bad person. But it was all self-check. I had to have... I had to supply 2 names and addresses for character witnesses to provide a character statement. I don’t know whether they were requested though. So, it was contact details for somebody to provide a character reference and I provided – one of my really good friends for the village is also a policeman. So, he certified all of my documents and he also provided a character reference – his email address and his address. I don’t think he had to sign anything to say it, but he had to agree in person. I don’t know whether they actually did that. I had to provide the letter of skills from my employer based on a template. Yea so, when the visas came back in January, they said well this is your visa paperwork and of course, it’s all just digital. So, it was just like a think you print out. But as a condition of your visa, you must have your health insurance. I’m like, yeah, that’s fine, I’ll do it. But, by the time I got around to doing it, it was like 3 days before we were leaving and I was like.. what if they ask me at the airport, have you got your health insurance and if I say ‘Not yet’, then they might not let me in through the border. Okay – so try to do it online. And there are a number of – the university game me a list of insurance people who would do the health insurance for me so I went through them – basically just trying to find the cheapest one coz UK health have a reciprocal agreement with Medicare so that still covers you for the basics and… like I finished work on the Friday, flew in the Saturday – this is the Wednesday, I thought I’d get this organised. Just between selling everything and saying goodbye to people, it just slipped my mind. So, it wasn’t through. I had submitted all the applications and done all the paperwork but didn’t receive a confirmation yet. So, I had visions of us being stopped at the airport. But actually, nobody said anything. In about a week that I was here, I actually phoned up the company that I had submitted my applications to to see – am I insured, whats happened and he said oh yeah we just need a bit more information and then we’ll back date it to the date you arrived. So, that was quite straight forward. I actually don’t know, I think I’m with NIB, but I don’t know what I’m insured for. Never used it. We’ve had three visits to the doctors for my kids since we’ve been here but just used Medicare. Nobody even asked for this. But it’s a condition of our visa. The condition of our visa is always have health insurance and I don’t take any work apart from this job but Alans open to work wherever he wants to work. My husband was worried about his police checks because he was arrested as a teenager for being drunk and disorderly. But, he’s like, he’s 46. So that’s a really long time ago but he was really anxious about it. But that was all fine. I don’t think there was anything that took long to come through or that was difficult to get. I guess in this whole process, we were realising how much money it was gonna cost and thinking is it worth it? Coz we had to pay the visa fees and we also – we have to education fees here. So, each of the kids, we have to pay the government fee of $5200 per child per year to go to school. So, that was gonna be extra. Its meant to be lump sum but we argued that I’ve got 3 kids. I cant afford that and all this. So, we’re paying in 2 blocks. It is still a lot of money. It wasn’t until a couple of weeks ago.. somebody said that, that’s actually a lot similar to some of the private school fees for primary, and you could’ve thought to put your younger one in private school. But actually, they’re settled in this school. Its interested because the schools don’t get that money. The schools get about, I think they said, about a hundred dollars extra but the government get that money. So, what am I paying that money for? Do you know what I mean – like if its not going to schools for providing education for my child. That was another reason I wanted PR at the start because then I don’t have to pay the school fees. 



M:	Technology



L:	All the visa prep was all online. All submission of documents, even the police check, everything – it was all online which was simple, easy. I guess from, probably when I was invited out was when I started doing some actual online research thinking hmm this might actually happen. So, I… it was really difficult finding information about family migration and stories of family migration. I found one blog and I kept coming back to her information (I cant remember the name) – and it was things like thinking about schools, thinking about suburbs to live in, and she was just one person who actually migrated herself I think and its quite out of date. But everything I searched for, I just came back to her. So, it was this one woman blog. It was quite outdated but she had guest submissions to her blog. I guess she had guest submissions about visas and stuff. Why it was so difficult – there was lots of information about 457 but because 482 was so new, it was difficult. There was very little in terms of peoples experiences around it. That was difficult. I don’t Facebook, I don’t use FB. I have FB to have access to my kids dancing classes because that’s where they post that information, but I don’t use it as a networking thing. So, there was nothing on there that I looked at. But this suburb site – its like a suburb rating site – I used that a lot. And the problem with these kind of sites is that they’re like review sites but people only post negative reviews generally because there’s no incentive for you to post something positive. But, they were a good indicator of what a suburb was like I felt and so we did use that a lot for reviews and Domain and Real estate. I was really just wanting to find a resource that was about family migration but its fluid. There’s not such a thing as a resource. Who’s gonna keep it up to date? I’m sure there were those things where I clicked at something and there was a response in a forum but I never engaged in a forum. There are – although now – our house that we rented for a year, the owner, the house owner, out it up for sale about a month ago. I was like oh no were gonna have to move again, what are we gonna do. There were a couple of open houses and then it got sold. It got sold in the 2nd viewing, and the people who bought it are gonna continue having it as a rental so we can continue to stay there. So, we were like phew. But I did join the Sutherland shire community facebook page because I was looking for other houses in that area. There’s a buy and sell and swap page, but for me, I was hoping to find other accommodation on that site. Although I didn’t need to use it but that’s what I imagined I would use it for. 



M:	Social Connections



L:	So def my cousin Stuart who was based here for most of the time. He was quite important. I guess he was important for providing that safe post box but also to know there was somebody here if something was to go crazy and also when I knew, so it wasn’t gonna be the job I applied for but there was gonna be a job, I needed to know that the money they were offering me was money that I could live on coz I actually had no idea. In the greater scheme of things – how much does it cost to live in Sydney, was I gonna be able to live on that wage. So, this is someone I could ask those questions to.. this is what theyre offering me. Is it worth it? Would I manage to live on that? And of course he said yes. So, he was like a sounding board. Martin here, who is my line manager. He is from Austria originally. So he’s a migrant too and he shared about his experience, and hes been here a long time now. It was helpful coz hes got kids too and he talked about what that was like. His kids are kinda similar ages as well. Lots of people at home in Scotland were really nice. So, when the community, they heard that we were moving they were like ‘Oh we’ve got family here, or we know this person’. So we got lots of addresses and phone numbers. We never followed up on any of them. But, I guess they’re all kinda there. We just haven’t had time. It was so fast. So, people were always happy to provide, you know like somebody, in this context that could help if you needed them. And, Amika, whos the HR relocation person – she was great because I sent her lots of emails to say…what about this, what about this, how long till I get my money back. I don’t know if there was anybody else. I did it all. Alan just got on the plane with the kids. He didn’t really do any of this. And then I guess we had the people at the stage that we sold our house. Actually, we put it up for sale when we were still there, but it sold after we left. So, my mum and dad were power of attorney to sign off on that.



M:	Husband?



L:	So, when we arrived the kids… So in Scotland, the schools run from August to July. That’s the school year. But here the School year runs January to December. So, we moved in Feb.. they had already done 6 months of school – in the school here. So, when we got here, they had to go back 6 months which meant that they didn’t have to go to school straight away. They had about 6 weeks to get settled in before they went to school. So, Alan didn’t work that time, and it was good for me because it meant I could focus on getting to work, finding my feet, not having to worry about childcare and that kind of this. So, that was the first 6 weeks. Then we moved into our house in Sutherland shire so that was a couple of weeks before school and then there was Easter holidays. So, he said he’d probably go to work after Easter holidays. They went back to school after Easter holidays and he started looking for things, for jobs, but there was nothing really. I don’t that he was actively looking, and then there was summer holidays. My daughter got sick in between so she missed about 2 weeks of school in that term so he was off for that, which was okay. And then there was the summer holidays. So, it was like, okay, after the summer holidays, and after the summer holidays I had to go to Malaysia. So it was like, okay after I come back from Malaysia. So now the kids are back into school and hes gonna have to start looking for something. But hes gonna look for something part-time so he can work around the kids. He fancies a career change but he doesn’t know what and he isn’t the kinda, you know, hes in a new place, perfect place to have a career change. But the longer hes gonna think about it, the harder it is going to be for him to get a job. You know, the confidence, and so on. But he needs to build a network, so I feel he needs to get a job, and I’ve been trying to do that in a diplomatic way. Laughs. But, it’s just not happening. So, he is, he doesn’t really do online coz internet was after he left school and all that. But he does do Gumtree coz that’s where he was looking at cars, on Gumtree, coz we don’t have a car yet. So, that’s what hes focusing on at the moment. But, he does the school run in the morning. So, he sees all the parents and stuff but the area that we live in, its more of a – its not really a city – its more of a suburb. So a lot of the mums don’t work.. theres a lot of stay at home mums.. so its mostkly mums at school who actually don’t really speak to him. But he has made… so we have 2 sets to neighbours that we have become good friends with and he has 2 other neighbours – one is 70 and one is 80 – and they keep knocking on our door to ask him to come and do little jobs, like lift things, or fix this, or fix that. Every time he does that, they try to pay him and hes like no I’m not taking money for this. So he comes home with these things.. he came home with a golf set.. he came home with a mixer… theyre just giving him stuff. So, hes been meeting people but he doesn’t have a network of people who are the same age, and I think that’s what he would need for him to get into work. And I think, its difficult coz our roles have completely been reversed as well. So, he was the main breadwinner and now hes not working at all, and I’ve got a network here and he doesn’t have that. So, its difficult for him. I don’t doubt that its difficult for him, and that makes him homesick. And because he was away working offshore a lot of the time, so he didn’t have the time with the kids. So, its nice for him to have that. But he has to adjust to what that feels like because it isn’t all roses like he imagines it. The kids are grumpy in the morning and he gets annoyed about making lunches, and da da da.. so I think, its just gonna take some time. 



M:	Regulatory



L:	It was a bit of … it wasn’t really for the visa but it was a bit of a hassle trying to get my tax file number sorted out because I had one in 2001 for the WHV, and I wasn’t sure if I needed to get a new one or I could just reactive it, and they said I could just reactivate it and then there was a problem with the reactivation. 



M:	Immigration polices?



L:	When we were thinking about coming in 2011, I read a lot about different visa options and how we could go about it, what that would be like, what the requirements were. Think time around, it just happened so quickly, I just went with the flow. Usually I’m really, I do a lot of research. I’m a researcher, that’s what I do. But this time, it was almost like it happened. I didn’t expect it to be so easy and I did not expect the visa to come through so quickly and I think its because of the university in part because it’s a huge institution and they do this regularly. One of the big concerns I had coming was disrupting the kids, you know they had friends, and their lifestyle. So, I was really wanted to make sure that.. So, my daughter dances and my son does jujitsu. So, I wanted to find somewhere that they could get back into this stuff straight away. So that had a lot to do choosing the location as well. And I did use that Sutherland shire FB page to see what dances available, what jujitsu places. So, I guess that helped get recommendations because theres 100’s of dance schools. Whats a good dance school. So I did use that. There was, one of the first weeks, in our house. There was a local newspaper that came through, and it was volunteer week, and there was a call out for volunteers to go visit older people, elderly people. So we had a chat at home and we thought well lets sign up for that because the kids don’t have their grannies anymore… just that intergenerational connection. But we never got around to that. That’s on my list to do because I think that they’re missing that and if they can give that to somebody who doesn’t have that, that would be a good thing. But, its just time. 



M:	Do you give migration advice?



L:	Im trying to recruit one of my former colleagues to come do a PhD here and I keep telling her how easy it is to come. Shes not convinced. But I guess Im just trying to share that knowledge. But in terms of challenges, I guess its just that things online – particularly for academic migration – were framed around the single academic, and not with their family because threes a lot of movement within academic staff but not always with kids and a husband. And even, the information from the immigration adviser was framed around, okay what does it mean for me to come as a single person, but I was like, I’m also coming with 3 kids. What does that mean for US? So, that’s the main one. But then nobody’s got exactly the same story. So, I don’t know what I was looking for. Its constant movements with academics and actually now that Im here, there’s lots of international staff here, and there was lots of international staff in my previous job as well but you just kind of take it for granted when you’re home. You don’t really think that they’re going through all this visa stuff in the background. But academia is international. I do quite a lot of travelling with work anyway. Not so much here, greanted. But last 2 years have been 5 or 6 destinations a year. So, I’m quite happy to navigate that system. I guess maybe for Alan who doesn’t do that much travelling, hes anxious he doesn’t have a physical visa in his passport. So, when I did my first move we both had the WHV stuck in our passport – like something like China do now. But now everything’s online, so he feels anxious coz he doesn’t have something to say that he’s entitled to be here. He’s looking for that physical stamp that says he can be here, especially at airports. It doesn’t bother me much but I know that it causes him some anxiety. 



M:	What about family moving here?



L:	Im certainly dropping hints to my family for them to move here but theyre still working. So, what they’ll do is that they’ll retire and then spend 3 months here and 3 months in Canada, not in Africa because where my sister lives is not safe. My sister is coming out at Christmas. It’s a surprise for the kids. I’m gonna wrap her in a box at the front door… if I can keep that a secret. What I would like is for her to migrate. She would do great. Shes 10 years younger than me. She loves her job, very career oriented, not married, no kids and I think she would do really well here. I don’t know. I would like her to come out here. Shes never been. 



M:	Migration elsewhere?



L:	I definitely am much more open to that and I would go anywhere. I think it would depend on what the role is and my offer. I guess, Alan would like to go to NZ. He spent a year working there and he would like to move there. He sees himself live there. I guess Canada is an option. My brothers there and he loves it – absolutely loves it. But even back to Europe, maybe Switzerland or Denmark, something like that. Although, Im quite open to that but ceaser has got his exams next year and that’s gonna limit where we take him. We have to think about what will happen to his education, and then we have to think about university. In Scotland university is free if you’re a Scottish resident. You don’t pay any fees. But you’ve got to be living in Scotland for 3 years before you apply for university. So, if we stay here for 4 years, he will be the age to go to university, and if we go home to Scotland, we would have to pay for his education. He won’t get that free coz he would’ve been out of the country. I think we’re imagining that we’re not gonna go back but that will be something we think about if we were to move somewhere else. 



M:	Future plans?



L:	I think def the plan is for PR, ideally and maybe buy a house. I don’t know. We sold our house and at the moment that money is sitting in the back, risking being spent on other things. But, its just so expensive here that we don’t know if we will buy a house or we’ll just rent, or will we move elsewhere in Australia. Again, that will be dictated by my post, my job, whether it will be a promotion or just a similar role in another area. Definitely be open to looking at, although I love it here, but potentially somewhere norther, where its cheaper for houses. Because we come over with just suitcases, we spent the first 3 months just buying furniture, looking for furniture, or like cutlery… all of the things you don’t really miss until you’ve got to use them. So, I’ve just got a dining table to get and a car – those are the two things. We’re actually looking for a van so we can go away and things, you know, we can put bikes at the back or the surfboards at the back. One thing I do love about Sydney is the public transport. It’s just so easy and so cheap. It’s just so so cheap compared to Scotland. So cheap. Im in the highlands of Scotland where the infrastructure is really poor, the buses run, like, every hour and the train network doesn’t reach anywhere you need to go. So, I’m loving the public transport. So, we go to the beach. Most Sundays were at the beach. Saturdays, the kids have clubs – dancing and all those things. But once we have a van, the idea is that we’ll go on a Friday night and come back on Sunday. Once we had decided to come, I was thinking Oh God, theres gonna be no house that we can afford. Everythings gonna be super expensive. The housing is super expensive. But in terms of food, like its pretty much the same that we pay in Scotland. For paying the bills, electricity and gas is cheaper than what we were paying in Scotland. So, I guess we are.. actually, we’re on one wage but probably living the same quality of life that we were in Scotland which is good. Just 70% of my wages in going on accommodation which is crazy. Super crazy. Everything else is alright. That’s another reason why Alan needs to start working. Im really conscious... I don’t want to start chipping away our house money coz oce we start, its gonna be gone. You know what – you’ve just left me with a question of whether my friend was asked for a character reference or not. 



M:	Mapping?



L:	Yes. So, I love it. This is exactly what I did in my PhD interviews as well. I did mapping. For me, selfishly what attracted me to do this research is that everything’s been so much of a blur, its just been so quick. I haven’t had time to sit back and think what did it mean, what did I have to do. So, this has given me the space to do that. Actually, its quite amazing I managed to do all of that in that length of time.